[Amit Varma]: Here's one way to think about journalism. It's a business driven by supply and demand.
[Amit Varma]: People want news, analysis, narratives, whatever. You form a publication that delivers and cater
[Amit Varma]: to what readers want. Your bottom line is the bottom line. Your dharma, as it were,
[Amit Varma]: is to your shareholders. Principles matter only to the extent that principles are in
[Amit Varma]: demand. You gotta be rational. You gotta stay solvent. That's one way of looking at it.
[Amit Varma]: But there are other impulses that can drive journalists. You can say that truth matters,
[Amit Varma]: especially in these polarized and complex times, and that searching for the truth has
[Amit Varma]: a value of its own. You can be driven by the urge to tell stories about the world that
[Amit Varma]: would otherwise be lost in the din. You can tell yourself that the world is often shaped
[Amit Varma]: by what we know of it. And therefore, it is important to seek out the full picture. And
[Amit Varma]: you may believe that enough people share this view for it to be worthwhile, for the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line also to be taken care of. As you would have guessed, I believe in the second school
[Amit Varma]: of thought. I believe we don't always have to follow our audiences and second guess what
[Amit Varma]: the political masters of this country may want. I believe journalists and storytellers
[Amit Varma]: can lead from the front, can form public opinion by informing public opinion, by relentlessly
[Amit Varma]: deepening our understanding of the truth. I admire the handful of people committed to
[Amit Varma]: this quest. One of them is my guest today.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest today is Barkha Dutt, a fearless and pioneering
[Amit Varma]: television journalist who's seen it all. She's been at the frontline of wars, terrorist attacks
[Amit Varma]: and pandemics. While others sit at home and pontificate or signal their virtue or wisdom
[Amit Varma]: on social media, Barkha goes out there and reports. She started in NDTV and after more
[Amit Varma]: than two decades there, has ended up forming Mojo Story, an indie outfit that is breaking
[Amit Varma]: new ground on YouTube. Her coverage of the pandemic over the last 16 months has been
[Amit Varma]: incredible. I enjoy chatting with Barkha and we spoke not just about journalism, the media,
[Amit Varma]: Indian politics and society, but also about her own self, how she has grown, what she
[Amit Varma]: has learned, how she now looks at the world and her place in it. She also has some great
[Amit Varma]: advice for young people who may be trying to figure out who they are and what they want
[Amit Varma]: to do. Before we begin this conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is, how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: I discovered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world
[Amit Varma]: a little better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future
[Amit Varma]: Stack batches start every Saturday. Also, check out their Social Capital Compound, which
[Amit Varma]: helps you master social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees
[Amit Varma]: 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Uplevel yourself. Barkha, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. This has been a long time planning and I'm glad we're finally able to
[Guest]: do it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm glad we're finally able to do it. And in fact, I felt guilty even asking you because
[Amit Varma]: for much of this time in the last few months, you were doing so much incredible journalism
[Amit Varma]: and going out there while very few others were and I thought I should not impinge on
[Amit Varma]: your time. But we finally managed to make the time and it's a Sunday. Now typically,
[Amit Varma]: I start by asking my guests about their childhood and how they grew up and all of that, which
[Amit Varma]: I will do for you also. But before that, I'm intrigued by what your routine must be and
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure all your viewers also must be intrigued at what is your workflow? What do you do on
[Amit Varma]: a Sunday? Typically, do you get time to relax? What's all that like, like, where do you find
[Amit Varma]: your me space?
[Guest]: First, thanks, Amit. And you know, it hasn't been just a few months since I was counting
[Guest]: the other day, it's actually been 16 months of pretty much non-stop COVID coverage. There
[Guest]: have been some other stories that I've turned my attention to. But otherwise, this has been
[Guest]: a singular obsession for 16 months now. Sundays now are difficult days for me. Before my father
[Guest]: died and my father died to COVID earlier this year, a few months ago. Sunday was the day
[Guest]: that all of us gathered at the family house in a colony in Delhi called Changpura Extension.
[Guest]: It's the house I lived in till I was 40 years old. And I lived with my dad in that house.
[Guest]: He continued to stay there. And Sunday was always family lunch with my father. And we
[Guest]: continue to gather even after he's gone at the house for lunch. And unless you know there's
[Guest]: something catastrophic happening or I'm traveling in terms of work. And otherwise, that's it.
[Guest]: I don't have the idea or the notion of a weekend. I work pretty much through most weekends.
[Guest]: Other than the Sunday lunch, which is some sort of time out. My weekday and my weekend
[Guest]: is not that distinct. But because I think my team does need more time off than I do.
[Guest]: We do try and not do any show or broadcast on Sundays unless we're reporting and traveling.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. Let's travel back to your childhood now. You know, we are almost the same age.
[Amit Varma]: I think you're just a couple of years older than me.
[Unknown]: I'm 49. How old are you?
[Amit Varma]: I'm 47. Pretty much the same, especially if depends on your vantage point. If you're 21,
[Amit Varma]: then yeah Barkha and I are exactly the same age. If you're 48, we are not the same age.
[Amit Varma]: What I find interesting when I chat with a guest of this vintage on the show is that
[Amit Varma]: we are the one generation that in a sense had to learn about the world twice. Like earlier
[Amit Varma]: we learned about it, you know, in the pre internet days through whatever we could get
[Amit Varma]: hold of. It was a question of what was accessible to us. You and I I think had fairly privileged
[Amit Varma]: childhoods access to books, all of that was there. But the world was, you know, remarkably
[Amit Varma]: close to us relative to how it is today. And then in my own case, there is another kind
[Amit Varma]: of learning about the world that happened when the internet came and you could, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you could read any book you wanted, you could get a wide cross section of opinions
[Amit Varma]: rather than have it come at you through specific gatekeepers and all that. And that's another
[Amit Varma]: kind of broadening. And we are the one generation that kind of went through this right the people
[Amit Varma]: before us, the internet came too late for them. And and those after us only know the
[Amit Varma]: world where all information is on your fingertips. And you don't have to, you know, scrounge
[Amit Varma]: to somehow get that cassette mixtape recorded that you've been trying to for months. So
[Amit Varma]: for that reason, I always find it interesting to learn about the childhoods of my guests.
[Amit Varma]: So what was your sort of childhood like? Where did you grow up? And you know, what did you
[Amit Varma]: do as a kid? What was your conception of yourself?
[Guest]: It's a really interesting question. And I think my childhood pretty mixed up, which
[Guest]: might explain why my adulthood is just as mixed up. So I grew up in Delhi, but also
[Guest]: partly in New York. So I had an atypical growing up for a middle class family, very middle
[Guest]: class families, salaried employees as parents. My father worked with Air India as in the
[Guest]: commercial and tourism department. And my mother was a journalist, pretty big trailblazer
[Guest]: for her time, worked with the Hindustan Times. To the age of five, we lived in this neighborhood
[Guest]: called Sujan Singh Park, which is, you know, next to Khan Market on a rented flat. And
[Guest]: then my father's family, which had come in as refugees from what is now Pakistan during
[Guest]: partition, they had been allotted a small little plot in Jankura extension, which was
[Guest]: really a refugee colony. And my parents were able to build a house on that. And then from
[Guest]: the age of five to 40, I pretty much lived in that house where I just spoke about having
[Guest]: Sunday lunch. But in the interim, my father got a pretty longish posting with Air India
[Guest]: to New York. And my mother, because she worked with the Hindustan Times here and did not
[Guest]: want to give up her job, but then took a sabbatical, worked with the United Nations in New York.
[Guest]: So we spent, my sister and I spent our early years shuttling between these two cities and
[Guest]: actually studying in two schools simultaneously. So we studied in modern school in Delhi, and
[Guest]: we studied in public school 99 in Kew Gardens, Queens in New York. And therefore, we had
[Guest]: a pretty muddled, not a typical childhood, probably more global exposure than is possible
[Guest]: for middle class Indians, especially those of us, you know, as you said, of this vintage.
[Guest]: And equally, while in Delhi, still have very distinct memories of, you know, the one rupee
[Guest]: book from the colony library, such as it was, the camel guy who would come around, the guy
[Guest]: who would come around with swings, and you'd pay them and you know, you do those rides
[Guest]: in front of your house, had a tire strung from a tree as you know, the swing that you
[Guest]: could step out and, and play on. So it was a strange mix of a very typical, ordinary
[Guest]: middle class home in terms of economics, but unconventional, at least for what my mother
[Guest]: did for her time, and atypical for the global, somewhat westernized early exposure we had
[Guest]: because of my father's postage. So I think there was a little bit of there was a kind
[Guest]: of hodgepodge in the in the growing up.
[Amit Varma]: And do you think that because of this kind of hodgepodge ness, and this almost metaphorical
[Amit Varma]: fact of, you know, being in two schools at the same time, did you feel that that set
[Amit Varma]: you apart from the kids around you, for example, when you came back to India, that they looked
[Amit Varma]: at the world in a certain way, and you had another layer to your understanding, not in
[Amit Varma]: a judgmental way that this is, you know, of a good or a bad thing, but just that you see
[Amit Varma]: some things differently. And, you know, and your observations of them would have been
[Amit Varma]: partly from the outside and, and therefore, kind of more interesting than just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: one girl looking at another girl, but you've also got that extra layer there. So what did
[Amit Varma]: you feel when you looked around you at your friends at India? Did it in any sense, feel
[Amit Varma]: a constraint to be in Delhi after having lived in New York? What was that like?
[Guest]: Well, I mean, now that I think of it, I think maybe I was always a little bit of a misfit.
[Guest]: Like I think I do today feel very much like a misfit. And when you asked me the question
[Guest]: and I look back at my childhood, I think I was a misfit, not just because of this sort
[Guest]: of bicultural upbringing, but also because of the way my personality was. And so before
[Guest]: we come to what happened when I came back to Delhi, I grew up, you know, if there's
[Guest]: any other city I even consider calling home after India, it's New York. But I grew up
[Guest]: in a, in a racist New York. I did not grow up in the New York that the world knows today
[Guest]: as this all accepting, you can be whoever you want to. This was still the early seventies.
[Guest]: There was still a lot of, you know, a kind of white assertion. My mother who used to
[Guest]: wear saris and used to walk us to school and used to wear a bindi was taunted. I have very
[Guest]: distinct memories of kids running behind us and taunting her for her bindi and her sari,
[Guest]: not being especially friendly with me at school. There wasn't that complete fitting in there.
[Guest]: And I don't think that there was a complete fitting in here, which doesn't mean that I
[Guest]: didn't have an easygoing personality, but I didn't always have a gregarious personality.
[Guest]: And in fact, like my mother wrote a series of stories about a semi-fictionalized character
[Guest]: named after me in a children's magazine called Target. And one of the stories that she wrote
[Guest]: in this Barkha series was called Barkha and the People Tree. And it was about this girl
[Guest]: who on family holidays, when the cousins were all playing amongst themselves, would choose
[Guest]: to sit under the people tree and have a conversation with the people tree instead of talking to
[Guest]: the cousins. So when I think about it and I piece all of this together, maybe I was
[Guest]: always a bit of a misfit.
[Amit Varma]: There was an interesting book which came out in the nineties, which was really controversial.
[Amit Varma]: It's a book called The Nurture Assumption by Judith Rich Harris, where she kind of argued
[Amit Varma]: against a myth that parents really form their children. She looked at different studies
[Amit Varma]: of twins who were separated at birth and so on and so forth. And her kind of conclusion,
[Amit Varma]: which was backed by the science and which was very sort of solid was that kids when
[Amit Varma]: they're growing up are shaped more by their peers and their parents. Like, of course,
[Amit Varma]: they get the genes from their parents and all of that. I mean, it is what it is. But
[Amit Varma]: apart from that, they're shaped more by their peers. Now, in your case, you say that one,
[Amit Varma]: you were a bit of a misfit where you were people tree and all that, and maybe you were
[Amit Varma]: shaped by the people tree also. But at the same time, just looking at the bare biographical
[Amit Varma]: details that your mother is a pathbreaking journalist at a time where it was much harder
[Amit Varma]: for a woman to be a pathbreaking journalist in India. And both her daughters have also
[Amit Varma]: gotten into journalism, which kind of seems to go against the normal kind of grain there.
[Amit Varma]: So if I were to ask you what shaped you, like one, what was your conception of yourself
[Amit Varma]: as a teenager? For example, what did you want to become? What did you see yourself as? And
[Amit Varma]: two, what kind of shaped you? What were your big early influences in that sense, if you
[Amit Varma]: can, you know, put your finger on it?
[Guest]: So I think that the binary doesn't hold, right? Like I can, I can trace back distinct influences
[Guest]: that belong to my parents in different ways. I think it took my father to die for me to
[Guest]: realize what an overwhelming influence he had been in my life. I had always identified
[Guest]: with my mother. She had the most dramatic story. You know, she had the story of being
[Guest]: the first woman war correspondent of India. She had the story of being the rebel who walked
[Guest]: into Hindustan Times and was told by the editor, well, if you want to be a woman journalist,
[Guest]: we can send you to cover the flower shows. You know, she had the story of the struggle,
[Guest]: the rebellion, the fight, the gumption, the courage. And she died when I was really young,
[Guest]: which also amplified her influence. And then it took my father to die for me to realize
[Guest]: that actually he'd been my main parent just by the fact that he'd been around longer and
[Guest]: for decades. And there were other values that I had drawn from him that maybe I hadn't even
[Guest]: consciously realized, but it's equally true that I believe that who I am was also very
[Guest]: formed in the ages between 18 and 20, where I went to college, the kind of friends I made,
[Guest]: the kind of broad value system that took roots then. And it was not, in my case, it's unusual
[Guest]: because I did not come from a conservative, typically conservative family in terms of
[Guest]: values. So there was, my pure values were not at odds with my familial values. And sometimes
[Guest]: that happens, but for me, there was a sort of continuum that was possible. And so I do
[Guest]: feel that if I'd studied elsewhere, my school shaped me in being this sort of tough nut
[Guest]: and, you know, extracurriculars and playing basketball and doing theater and doing all
[Guest]: of that. But in terms of core values, I was shaped very much by my college and my parents.
[Guest]: So I think for me, it was both. But in terms of the self-image, I don't know, you know,
[Guest]: I don't remember my self-image before my mother died, but I have this memory of being a nightmarish
[Guest]: daughter, extremely rebellious, extremely surly, broody. My mother used to call me grumps
[Guest]: even when she was alive, because I was this broody child, thought too much and argued
[Guest]: too much. And I think in my image of myself growing up, I was the ultimate rebel. You
[Guest]: know, I thought of myself as very rebellious. It's taken me to get into my 40s and almost
[Guest]: 50 to kind of see that my life is actually pretty pedestrian and boring almost, like
[Guest]: I think now. When I was 13, 14, 15, I thought of myself as this grand rebel. That was my
[Guest]: conception of myself. Wild child, you know, I wanted to imagine myself to be a wild child.
[Guest]: I'm horrified that you should describe your life as pedestrian. What about the rest of
[Guest]: us? You know, you kind of alter your own standards, right? I guess that's what happens. You have
[Guest]: a conception of your life. I would have loved to be, and I don't know why I didn't go that
[Guest]: route, but I would have loved to be actually an international correspondent, you know,
[Guest]: traveling to like crazy parts of the world and reporting from the world. But at some
[Guest]: point, and I always wondered if it was a fatal error, at some point after my post-grad at
[Guest]: Columbia, I was like, I want to work in my country. That's the only place where I care
[Guest]: about the news. And I came back. But you know, when I say my life is pedestrian, like I'm
[Guest]: saying at the end of it, like what is so rebellious about what I do? Okay. There are certain things
[Guest]: like I'll get into a car and I'll just sit in the car and go and cover COVID when very
[Guest]: few other people will. I have that. I have a capacity for risk-taking, but on a day to
[Guest]: day basis, I live a pretty mundane life.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, one of the themes that I have been thinking of in recent years, and
[Amit Varma]: that also relates to one's conception of oneself, is that one can define oneself or one can
[Amit Varma]: form one's conception of oneself by thinking about the things that we want to do, or one
[Amit Varma]: can form it by thinking about the person we want to be. And I think just looking back
[Amit Varma]: when I was much younger, the mistake I perhaps made was forming that in terms of the things
[Amit Varma]: I want to do that I want to do A, B, C, these are all my achievements, which I want to be
[Amit Varma]: lauded for and blah, blah, blah. And as you kind of grow older, at least in my case, the
[Amit Varma]: realisation came that that is a mistake. And one, of course, it is easy to rationalise
[Amit Varma]: it as a mistake, because one hasn't managed to do most of them. But the other part of
[Amit Varma]: it is that that's not really a route to happiness. I think it's much more thinking about the
[Amit Varma]: kind of person that you want to be, focusing on the concrete details of everyday life rather
[Amit Varma]: than abstract goals and dreams and whatever.
[Guest]: But they're not abstract, right? They're not abstract. Sorry, complete what you're saying
[Amit Varma]: and I'll respond.
[Amit Varma]: So no, I will just leading up to one, has there been a sort of evolution in that conception
[Amit Varma]: of yourself, perhaps along these lines, perhaps along different lines, in your time? And what
[Amit Varma]: I was also intrigued by is where you said that there was no difference between the influences
[Amit Varma]: from your peer group and your familial influences, because what held them together was this bedrock
[Amit Varma]: of values. So can you talk a little bit more about that? Because that seems to be to be
[Amit Varma]: more indicative of, you know, who you are, rather than whether you were an international
[Amit Varma]: correspondent or a local reporter.
[Guest]: I do try and persuade myself that that work is not everything. But like for me, literally
[Guest]: work is everything. And that is one of the things that makes me a misfit, because I literally,
[Guest]: I may know one or two other people who think like me, and I've known them a long time.
[Guest]: So, you know, we were in a way shaped similarly, but my identity is totally tied up to my work.
[Guest]: My sense of self is totally tied up to my work. My sense of purpose is totally tied
[Guest]: up to my work, and my sense of happiness is totally tied into my work. So when people
[Guest]: say work-life balance to me, I don't even begin to understand what it means, because
[Guest]: I carry my work everywhere. And equally, the reverse is true. We sometimes carry our home
[Guest]: into our work, and we carry our work into our home. So I never understood this millennial
[Guest]: idea of work-life balance. But I literally am quite, I would say, unusual. Also, I've
[Guest]: been told, I'm not trying to romanticize myself, but this is what I'm told, that I can work
[Guest]: nonstop. I can just keep working. I, you know, get off on it. I hide on it. It keeps me occupied.
[Guest]: It keeps me sane. It keeps me happy. It defines me. So I, I have, I'm never tired. I mean,
[Guest]: I might be tired and the damage shows in other ways, but I've never consciously, I'm too
[Guest]: tired to do this. So that's what I meant by saying that, you know, you keep trying to
[Guest]: talk yourself into, you know, life is elsewhere. Oh, I wish I could also do this. Oh, I wish
[Guest]: I could also do that. But actually, if you took away my work and you gave me all those
[Guest]: other things, I'd be miserable. So that's the first thing. Then in terms of core values,
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not saying that how my father and mother thought and how my friends at St.
[Guest]: Stephen's College thought is very similar. I'm sure had my mother in particular remained
[Guest]: alive, she would have possibly, despite being the trailblazer, been a more conservative
[Guest]: parent than my father turned out to be. I think my father was also a little hapless
[Guest]: being a single father to two completely, you know, uncontainable daughters. But what I
[Guest]: mean is that there's this idea of integrity, which has defined my closest friendships and
[Guest]: which I think was a very, was a big cornerstone of, of what I saw happen with my parents.
[Guest]: I saw both paying professional prices for holding on to what they believed to be correct,
[Guest]: not hustling enough in their workspaces, getting left behind sometimes in their workspaces
[Guest]: because of their idea of, you know, integrity. And the second thing was just the stubborn
[Guest]: individualism, right? That the thing that you will not be defined by anybody else's
[Guest]: idea of you. And I think I remember watching my mother and learning this from her early
[Guest]: on that if you do well, sure you'll be popular and there'll be accolades and there'll be
[Guest]: a lot of love. There'll be a lot of great things said about you, but there'll also be
[Guest]: a lot of dislike and a lot of resentment and a lot of pushback and a lot of bitchiness.
[Guest]: And you're going to have to wear your skin so thick that you cannot alter yourself because
[Guest]: of what is said about you. As a child, even I remember watching my mother go through this.
[Guest]: My father was a different sort of person. Everybody loved him. My mother was much more
[Guest]: like me where she triggered love or hate. She just never triggered indifference. And
[Guest]: I think that those are the two, I would say the cornerstone values, your notion of integrity
[Guest]: and stubborn individualism.
[Amit Varma]: So you kind of mentioned about how you work all the time and you don't understand the
[Amit Varma]: concept of work-life balance. And I also work all the time, though I think we could make
[Amit Varma]: a good Yin and Yang team because you said that you can work every minute and I can actually
[Amit Varma]: not work every minute. I shirk so much.
[Guest]: You, your podcasts are three hours long. Obviously you love working.
[Amit Varma]: Well, I work for at least three hours every week. That much cannot be denied. But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: but it seems to me that one reason why both of us are like this, that we can, that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the lines blur is that it's like that Venn diagram, right? Where there is a meeting
[Amit Varma]: point of what you love doing, what you're good at doing and what people will pay you
[Amit Varma]: for doing and wherever all three meet, that's what you should do. And that's what you are
[Amit Varma]: doing. And that's what I am kind of doing. And that's also what I tell young creators
[Amit Varma]: that this Venn diagram becomes inevitable if you persevere at what you love, because
[Amit Varma]: if you persevere at doing something that you love, iteration makes for excellence, eventually
[Amit Varma]: you'll be good at it. And then eventually you'll get paid for it. So it's just a kind
[Amit Varma]: of a question of sticking to it.
[Amit Varma]: Now speaking of conception of ourselves and all of that, we've kind of, you know, gone
[Amit Varma]: here and gone there and all of that. But the one thing that I'm interested in is when did
[Amit Varma]: you kind of decide to become a journalist? Because obviously having your mother as a
[Amit Varma]: role model at home must have been a really big deal. And what part of you, what part
[Amit Varma]: of it rather kind of excited you? Like I think when I think of what you're really doing,
[Amit Varma]: one thing that you are doing, at least for us, for all the people who watch your work
[Amit Varma]: is you are making sense of the world, that you're giving us more and more dots, which
[Amit Varma]: we can connect and we can get a better picture of the world. And that's what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And that that would be as a fan, that would be my one line definition of it. And in a
[Amit Varma]: different way, I try to do the same thing. So is there a way that like, when you're drawn
[Amit Varma]: to journalism, are you drawn to, let's say, an aspect of it that I you know, I want to
[Amit Varma]: uncover something about the world? Or are you also drawn to that sense of adventure
[Amit Varma]: that I will go out with my camera and I will, you know, uncover something and I will do
[Amit Varma]: investigation and all of that. So what drew you about it back then? And what do you love
[Amit Varma]: about it so much? Like when you went out in the COVID trail last year, right at the time
[Amit Varma]: the lockdown hit and what you've been doing for all these months, that is out of obviously
[Amit Varma]: love and it's a labor of love. It's not about the money. It's not about how many people
[Amit Varma]: are watching. You know, you would do that anyway. What is that? What is that urge?
[Guest]: That urge is to not be able to sleep at night unless you're telling that story. That is
[Guest]: what it is. I tell, you know, people ask me all the time, in particular young girls, you
[Guest]: know, what is your advice? What is, what is, what do we need? And I always say, if you
[Guest]: don't love it to madness, right? And I use the word, you know, without any sort of mental
[Guest]: health dimensions attached there. I'm just saying, if you don't love it to that point
[Guest]: of where it just makes you restless inside, where you can't stop thinking about it, then
[Guest]: this profession, there might be many other professions for you, but this profession in
[Guest]: its purest form is not, is not free. We'll talk a little bit later about the profession
[Guest]: itself. And I don't even know if people think like that anymore, but that's how I think,
[Guest]: right? So, you know, and I, and I can bookend it to whatever 1999 when the Kargil war erupts
[Guest]: and I've never reported a war. I don't come from a military family. I've just come back
[Guest]: from Columbia journalism school. And I'm like, how can I tell this story sitting in Delhi?
[Guest]: How, how there's a war happening in the Himalayas. I'm sitting in Delhi. I don't understand what
[Guest]: we're being told. I don't know what's going through the minds. I keep thinking, what is
[Guest]: that soldier thinking? What is that soldier feeling? And I know I have to go there and
[Guest]: it is, it is an expedition to get first my organization, then the army to agree to send
[Guest]: me as a woman to the war front. And when I fast forwarded to 2020, it is exactly the
[Guest]: same thing that happens to me. I am sitting here where I'm sitting, talking to you today
[Guest]: in my basement office and the lockdown gets announced and I say, Oh, let's go out and
[Guest]: see what's happening. And I drive to the border of Delhi and I see a long, I see nobody on
[Guest]: the streets. And I see a long line of men, women, and children walking. And I see nobody
[Guest]: there, no police, no bureaucrat. It's like the state has gone missing and these people
[Guest]: are walking. Then I go to a different border. Right now I'm still in Delhi and I'm just,
[Guest]: just literally driving in my car to these borders to see. And I see the same thing at
[Guest]: all the borders of Delhi, this exodus. And I come back and I cannot sleep. And I know
[Guest]: that the story cannot be reported by sitting in Delhi. And so begins my, from within almost,
[Guest]: it is involuntary. It is almost involuntary. It is something that you feel so strongly
[Guest]: that you know that you cannot tell this, you know, a particular, you cannot uncover a particular
[Guest]: truth. You cannot tell a particular story without actually being part of a certain kind
[Guest]: of journey. I don't know if I want to call it something as lofty or self-important as
[Guest]: uncovering the truth, but I do see the job or the role of a journalist, or sometimes
[Guest]: I call myself a storyteller because not all stories I tell necessarily have news value
[Guest]: that day. But I do see myself as a bridge between situations and people. And where I
[Guest]: feel that my readers or my viewers cannot travel to, cannot go to, cannot comprehend,
[Guest]: I can be that conduit. And I also see myself as this kind of reflection board of which
[Guest]: people's stories, problems, passions, emotions can bounce off. And, you know, I can be that
[Guest]: kind of white reflection board that they're bouncing off on. And it's just, if you had
[Guest]: asked me in school, do you want to be a journalist? I would have said no, because the rebellious
[Guest]: part of me did not want to do what my mother did. Right. It seemed very boring. It seemed
[Guest]: very predictable. It seemed like doctor ka bacha doctor, lawyer ka bacha lawyer, journalist
[Guest]: ka bacha journalist. It didn't seem cool in my head as a young kid to end up where one
[Guest]: of your parents is. And I trained to make movies and my first master's degree was in
[Guest]: film and television production. And I thought I'd make movies. It's just that I did not
[Guest]: enjoy those two years. I found them too pretentious. I found them too precious. I found everybody
[Guest]: thought that they were going to like, you know, be these poet philosophers who are going
[Guest]: to come in and alter the universe. And I just, you know, didn't, I didn't see myself in that.
[Guest]: But I trained to be a film editor. I trained to be a sound mixer. My first job was as a
[Guest]: television producer and not as a reporter. I wandered into reporting by accident. And
[Guest]: then once I did it, I just, I just loved it. I mean, like, it was just, it was love. I
[Guest]: mean, like, you know, it is the most intense emotion of all emotions that I have ever experienced
[Guest]: in my adult life is the love I feel when I'm out in the field reporting a story. There's
[Guest]: nothing compares to it. No human being, no experience, no other emotion. And I guess
[Guest]: that, you know, for all the corroded dimensions to Indian media today, it's still something
[Guest]: I love. I still love it in the way that I did when I was 22.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So did you actually see yourself then as a filmmaker, or did you hang out with all
[Amit Varma]: these people wanting to be the Indian Goda and say that no, no, not for me. And
[Guest]: I mean, if I, if I'd had one more class on jump cards and profundity, I just couldn't
[Guest]: do that whole, like I almost switched off watching movies because I was so miserable
[Guest]: with that sort of worthiness, you know, that worthiness that I don't have that worthiness.
[Guest]: You know, I, I think one of the reasons, I mean, we know that the right wing doesn't
[Guest]: especially like me, but one of the reasons that there are sections of the left, I think
[Guest]: that, that, that despise me just as much is that I just am not able to feel, I'm not able
[Guest]: to feel an ideological worthiness. I feel my, I have my values. I get things that I
[Guest]: feel strongly about and I will fight to, to the end about those, right. But I find it
[Guest]: very difficult to be affiliated to a thought, to a ism, to a, you know, and, and, and one
[Guest]: of the things that puts me off, and I'm sure there are people who think that I think of
[Guest]: myself as worthy and we can't control other people's perceptions of us, but I am put off
[Guest]: by worthiness, you know, the sense that we are, we are so deep, we are so artistic, we
[Guest]: are so creative. So, you know, like, so to that extent, like, and I remember when we
[Guest]: were in Jamia, people used to smoke in class and like, imagine they used to think that
[Guest]: this was cool and, and, and the teacher used to smoke and the students used to smoke and
[Guest]: I never used to smoke and I used to, I was made to feel like I was like this board, right.
[Guest]: And it's, it was all this sort of, you know, the gold flick creativity, if you will. And
[Guest]: I just was a misfit, I was a total misfit. And I think that's when I knew that I just
[Guest]: can't be, I'm not artsy enough for this, whatever artsy means. This isn't happening for me,
[Guest]: but I thought when I started it, that is what I wanted to do, that I wanted to make movies
[Guest]: and I enjoyed much more the technical part of it. You know, I enjoyed learning, you know,
[Guest]: even today it's, it's painful for me sometimes to watch Netflix because I can tell where
[Guest]: a shot ends and another shot begins because my eye is trained to see it. I can understand
[Guest]: sound. I've done sound mixing in the days when you carried a Nagra, whatever thing around
[Guest]: and separately picked up audio and who does any of that anymore? But I trained to do that,
[Guest]: right? I used to make sound in the NDTV studio where I started. So I, I liked the technical
[Guest]: stuff. I found that quite magical, but I couldn't be this clubby, creative, we are the artists,
[Guest]: artists unite person. I just couldn't be that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you spoke of worthiness and immediately I thought of modern social media and in a
[Amit Varma]: sense that image you just painted of from Jamia in the early nineties, great metaphor
[Amit Varma]: for social media today, that there is a class and students are smoking and the professor
[Amit Varma]: is smoking and they're all oblivious of the toxicity of the smoke.
[Guest]: Completely. And I remember once you tweeted something about, about how we, you know, we
[Guest]: all contain multitudes. And I think that is what we have, you know, I mean, if you want
[Guest]: to be creative, let's go back and read our Walt Whitman, because the point is that we
[Guest]: are not any one thought or any one person or any one ism. And the pressure of dogma
[Guest]: is the most suffocating, it's the most suffocating thing today. So, and that's why I pretty early
[Guest]: on in this conversation, identified myself as a misfit because I do not fit. There's
[Guest]: not a single ism that I fully relate. I identify as a feminist. Let me hasten to say that there
[Guest]: are two isms. If you ask me, you know, I don't shrug off all isms. Who are you? Are you a
[Guest]: feminist? Yes, I don't blink. I've answered yes to that question since I was 16. And I'll
[Guest]: answer yes to it today. But I might have a notion of feminism that is at loggerheads
[Guest]: with a 25 year old or a 55 year old, or even someone my own age. And that's what I mean
[Guest]: by not fully fitting into any ism.
[Amit Varma]: I love the way you said 25 and 55 as if you are just in between.
[Guest]: Well, I'm closer to the 55 at 49, but yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, that happens to me also. It takes time to adjust sometimes to how old.
[Guest]: Because we forget, right? We forget in my mind, like, I can't even believe I'm 49.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, we're still young, the world is out ahead of us. And all of that, the Whitman
[Amit Varma]: quote of containing multitudes has almost become a cliche on my show, and I keep invoking
[Amit Varma]: it. And I think it's necessary to invoke that sentiment, because a lot of the politics that
[Amit Varma]: we see, especially in the polarized spaces online, are based on pigeonholing people on
[Amit Varma]: reducing people to one thing or the other, that oh, you are a cishet white male, or oh,
[Amit Varma]: you are a Muslim, and therefore anti national or whatever. And it comes from both the right
[Amit Varma]: and the left, which is why I react so viscerally to all kinds of identity politics, whether
[Amit Varma]: people are bhakts or voks. Because I just think that, you know, the world is far more
[Amit Varma]: complex to reduce people to just one aspect of their identity becomes a problem. Let's
[Amit Varma]: go back to journalism in the sense that, when I look back on those times, and obviously,
[Amit Varma]: we've already discussed how the influences coming in are not so many today, I can go
[Amit Varma]: online and all the best journalism in the world is out there in front of me. And some
[Amit Varma]: of it from India, thanks to people like you. But back in the day, you don't really have
[Amit Varma]: that. So like you, you've kind of formed your values of who you are. But how does one form
[Amit Varma]: values of what good journalism is? What is your conception of good journalism, like in
[Amit Varma]: the little time that I spent in journalism in the aughties, I found that most mainstream
[Amit Varma]: journalists around me, this is in the context of sport, because I was a sports journalist,
[Amit Varma]: when I was doing it as a profession, were completely out of sync, like, that's not the
[Amit Varma]: kind of stuff that you know, you would teach or you would want people to do. So when you
[Amit Varma]: go there, what is your conception of journalism? How much of it comes from the people you are
[Amit Varma]: working with, who are your seniors who are guiding you? And over time, how does that
[Amit Varma]: conception evolve?
[Guest]: So again, I would not be typical, because of growing up as the daughter of my mother.
[Guest]: And because I actually, you know, had a reference point of her stories, and her daredevilry,
[Guest]: and her courage and her ferocity, in a way, like I think by osmosis, a little bit of it,
[Guest]: I was able to imbibe as reference points that, you know, a story is a story is sacred, like,
[Guest]: that's one of the things I learned from her, not your ideology. And I'm seguing a bit because
[Guest]: it relates to what we were discussing about polarizations. But just to give you a recent
[Guest]: example, you know, the farmers protest, when it was taking place, I spotted one day online,
[Guest]: a video of a Sikh man at a barricade arguing very politely and effectively with a police
[Guest]: officer. And I had no idea who the man was. So I started talking to my small team. And
[Guest]: I was like, hey, do any of you know who this guy is? He seems like an interesting person
[Guest]: to interview. So they said, oh, his name is Deep Sidhu. They found out his name is Deep
[Guest]: Sidhu. And he's an actor from Punjab. I had no idea who he was. I was like, oh, he's speaking
[Guest]: so interestingly in this video. Let's, maybe he'd be a new voice to get on this farmers
[Guest]: protest. So we track him down. It's an online interview. He's in the back of some car at
[Guest]: the border. And we're doing this interview. That particular day, the sort of right wing
[Guest]: trolls have gone on saying that the farmers protest, you know, farmers have been spotted
[Guest]: with Bhindranwale's pictures in their pockets. This is a Khalistani movement, so on, so forth.
[Guest]: I haven't seen this myself. I have been to report by then a few times. And I went a lot
[Guest]: after that as well. And I hadn't encountered this. But it was very much a kind of online
[Guest]: troll. And I thought that I would ask him about it. My expectation was that he would
[Guest]: simply dismiss it and he would, and we would move on. And it wasn't even the sort of centrality
[Guest]: of what I was asking. And I asked him about Bhindranwale and I was absolutely taken aback
[Guest]: because he launched into this long defense of this guy. And so he and I ended up having
[Guest]: an argument. And, you know, usually I don't think that the views of my guest have to be
[Guest]: my views and I'm able to hear something that I find unpalatable. But it was a very abrasive
[Guest]: sort of exchange. Unusual for me. I wasn't shouting or anything. I was saying, look,
[Guest]: you're defending a terrorist and I'm extremely uncomfortable with you defending a terrorist.
[Guest]: You assassinated an Indian prime minister, etc. And he was like, he was giving his view.
[Guest]: And I, and then I said, let's agree to disagree. And we moved on and the interview finished.
[Guest]: My younger colleagues who were working with me at that time said to me that I should not
[Guest]: have asked him this question because they felt that it would hurt the cause of the farmers.
[Guest]: And you know, that had we played into, in their minds, a right-wing trap. Right. So
[Guest]: I said to them that, look, the story, and when I use the word story, I mean it loosely
[Guest]: for that issue that I'm reporting on. The story is sacred. Whether the outcome or the
[Guest]: process of getting that story is a set of things you like, don't like, it ends up hurting
[Guest]: the side that you identify, don't identify with, has to be irrelevant to you. Right.
[Guest]: And we had a pretty fraught argument and sure enough, in the 24 hours after the interview,
[Guest]: I had a whole bunch of people on the left on Twitter attacking me for being a sellout
[Guest]: to the BJP for just saying, asking these questions. It was only many months later that Deep Siddhu
[Guest]: gets outed as the guy who actually sabotages the farmers movement on 26 January and ends
[Guest]: up being that extremist that he had clearly shown himself to be. And I remember telling
[Guest]: you this in a subsequent interview. I said, you remember that interview I did? And all
[Guest]: of you said to me, oh, you know, you're playing, you're pandering to the BJP. If you had just
[Guest]: flashed out this guy then because he had indicated who he was. Now I bring this up because there
[Guest]: is such an ideological filter that we put on the process of reporting today. Right.
[Guest]: I learned from my mother that you pursue the story, not the outcome. The outcome is not
[Guest]: relevant. Right. It has to be the process. You have to contribute with the process. So
[Guest]: when I am walking with migrant workers, I find it bizarre the number of people who ask
[Guest]: me, why didn't you give them a ride in your car? I mean, I can explain to everybody that
[Guest]: in my Maruti Ortega, four people fit along with my clothes at the back, but that is not
[Guest]: the point. My role is not to ferry one family, then a second, then a third. I can't do it
[Guest]: anyway. If I could at some humanitarian personal level, I did, but that's not my professional
[Guest]: role. My professional role is to tell that story and hope that that story will lead to
[Guest]: the policy change by which they will no longer be working. Right. So for me, the first value
[Guest]: is that the story is sacred, not yet. And I know what you will say. I take that point
[Guest]: that ways of looking, editing, who you interview, what your camera angle is, visual grammar,
[Guest]: they're all subject. Yes. But over so many years, I've done so many stories, but the
[Guest]: outcome has not been one that I like, but I still believe the story to be sacred. Right.
[Guest]: So for example, in 2019, I came back and I told every single person I knew that Modi
[Guest]: was going to sweep the election. And because everywhere I went, I found people who, you
[Guest]: know, who said, aur kaun hai? And I remember writing a column saying, it's the aur kaun
[Guest]: hai election. And nobody, none of my liberal friends was willing to believe me. Not one
[Guest]: of them was willing to believe me. Today, I tell them that it's my sense from doing
[Guest]: travels across India, that people are very sorrowful, but they're not enraged. And therefore,
[Guest]: I don't think that there will be a political consequence for the mismanagement of the pandemic
[Guest]: and the mismanagement is acute. And I've never minced my words in calling it out, but nobody
[Guest]: wants to hear this. So when we put these filters of our own preferred outcomes on the process
[Guest]: of telling a story, it is very problematic. So my value above all values is the story
[Guest]: is safe. And the second old fashioned value that I have is that you do not force a person
[Guest]: to talk. By which I mean, you know, yes, it's easy to caricature, you know, even all of
[Guest]: us as Mike, you know, Mike, you know, chasers or whatever, Mike chasers, chasers or whatever
[Guest]: we call it. I have chased a few cars in my younger age and, you know, mostly in funny
[Guest]: moments like, you know, but mostly when there'd be police barricades around them and you're
[Guest]: not being allowed to get in. So it's more actually trying to break the barricade than
[Guest]: to force the person to talk. But I believe that I'm not comfortable with sting operations.
[Guest]: I'm not comfortable with hidden cameras. I'm not comfortable. I'm just not comfortable
[Guest]: with covert ops reportage, right? I think that your reporting should be able to get
[Guest]: a person to come on camera or find some other way to tell that story. The agency belongs
[Guest]: to the person whose story you're telling. Yes, it's complicated when you're trying to
[Guest]: do an expose, but find a way to do it without doing stings and, you know, hidden camera
[Guest]: ops, just uncomfortable with them. I'm not saying I've never been associated with the
[Guest]: story that's used it. I'm just saying that I'm deeply uncomfortable with it. And that
[Guest]: the story is sick. The outcome can't decide what story you tell.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I completely agree with you on both these points. And some thoughts emerge, for
[Amit Varma]: example, you know, just thinking aloud on why stories matter so much and why stories
[Amit Varma]: can get the kind of responses that they do. Like back in, back in the good old years,
[Amit Varma]: we sound like two such old people. So back in the good old years, you know, if I had
[Amit Varma]: thought about this, I would have thought that stories matter because they explain more about
[Amit Varma]: they show more of the world to us and therefore they matter for that reason. But today they,
[Amit Varma]: you know, invoke such harsh reactions because people have formed narratives for themselves
[Amit Varma]: of how the world works. And they want your story to either confirm that simplistic narrative
[Amit Varma]: or you are therefore an enemy, which is why someone like you is always getting attacked
[Amit Varma]: on Twitter by one side or the other or both at the same time, because nuance is not acceptable.
[Amit Varma]: Either your story confirms a narrative or it doesn't. And either you're kind of with
[Amit Varma]: them or you're sort of not. Now, what I hold and what I think to some extent I have discovered
[Amit Varma]: through doing the podcast is that these are vocal minorities. So you have vocal minorities
[Amit Varma]: who are part of these echo chambers who are also signaling within their echo chambers
[Amit Varma]: to raise their status, who are smoking in the class in Jamia, as it were to go back
[Amit Varma]: to the metaphor. But there is a silent majority out there, which gets what you do, which which
[Amit Varma]: wants depth, which wants nuance, which appreciates that good faith effort. And I would imagine
[Amit Varma]: that someone like you would probably get a greater sense of that silent majority because
[Amit Varma]: you are interacting with many more people in the real world and in the road and not
[Amit Varma]: just in the screaming matches of Twitter. So what would your reaction be?
[Guest]: That's such a great point, because I always say that, you know, when a lot of people ask
[Guest]: me, hey, don't you get destabilized when you're attacked like this on Twitter? And I'm like,
[Guest]: of course, like sometimes it can be hurtful, sometimes it can be enraging. But it's not
[Guest]: my experience of the world. It genuinely isn't. My experience of the world is actually more
[Guest]: positive than negative in terms of the reaction that I receive. I, you know, I meet students
[Guest]: all the time. I meet old people all the time. For me, the loveliest thing is people talk
[Guest]: to me like they know me, you know, like just complete strangers will have full conversation
[Guest]: with me about their lives, like just completely intimate details. And it's the loveliest thing.
[Guest]: And it was reinforced for me, actually, through these COVID travels. You know, I have seen
[Guest]: so much kindness in these times, so much generosity from people. And the people can be famous
[Guest]: film stars and sports people, and they can be like just somebody I meet at a, you know,
[Guest]: on even on Twitter, even on Twitter, like, like, even people off Twitter have sent me
[Guest]: messages saying, do you need a place to sleep? Do you need food? I mean, I remember in the
[Guest]: first wave, so the second wave was logistically easier and emotionally just ravaging. And
[Guest]: the first wave was a logistical nightmare because there was no place to sleep, no food
[Guest]: to eat, dhabas were not open, you couldn't get a samosa or a glass of water. And you
[Guest]: had to, for me to find places to stay, I had to keep calling up district magistrates, getting
[Guest]: them, getting permission for some hotels or some guest house or something. And I was often
[Guest]: staying in, someone knew someone, someone, someone in a house, in a room, you know, in
[Guest]: Kota, I remember we stayed in some student hostel, in some other place, we stayed in
[Guest]: some kheer, one night we spent in a, in the car. I mean, they were just, it was crazy.
[Guest]: But because people saw this, they sent food, they sent clothes, my shoes broke and the
[Guest]: number of people who just wanted to give me shoes. And there was somebody I didn't know
[Guest]: and she's become a friend today. She lives in Mumbai and she was like, I can see that
[Guest]: you're out of clothes. Can I run a wash for you? I mean, she just randomly, complete stranger,
[Guest]: ran a laundry wash for me and said, how many days has it been since you've eaten a home
[Guest]: cooked meal? It was COVID, first wave, nobody was ready to invite anybody. She said, I don't
[Guest]: care. You come home. I'll be socially distant. I need to feed you. Like, I, I actually think
[Guest]: that if you stop paying attention to these echo chambers, right and left, I still believe
[Guest]: that most people are broadly commonsensical. What these sides disparage is sitting on the
[Guest]: fence. I don't think it's sitting on the fence. I think people make up their own minds. They
[Guest]: agree with some of what you do. They disagree with some of what you do. They like some things
[Guest]: about you. They may find some things irritating. That's life. I mean, which people do we know
[Guest]: about who we like everything, right? I don't know anybody whom I like all the time. So
[Guest]: I think if you are like 75% of the time, that's a great score. And my experience of life is
[Guest]: I am liked, even loved 75% of the time in, for among the people I meet. And so I've trained
[Guest]: myself to not get distracted by these very vocal, very voluble, sort of ideologues coming
[Guest]: at me from often both sides.
[Amit Varma]: So you mentioned a phenomenon which I've also noticed and which I also find very moving,
[Amit Varma]: which is people talking to you as if they know you, you know, the space for creators,
[Amit Varma]: I think has led to a greater scope for this kind of intimacy, like the metaphor that's,
[Amit Varma]: you know, been used before for something like this is if you are consuming entertainment
[Amit Varma]: at a cinema theatre, there's a certain distance between you and the screen. And there's a
[Amit Varma]: similar distance between the camera and the people. And it's a little distant and television
[Amit Varma]: brings it closer. You know, the TV is two, three meters away. And similarly, the camera
[Amit Varma]: and are separated. So you have friends and Seinfeld and all and YouTube is intimate,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you're watching something on a laptop screen, or you're watching something on your
[Amit Varma]: mobile phone, and the camera is also relatively close to the person. And that creates that
[Amit Varma]: kind of intimacy. The other aspect of this, besides the intimacy of the medium itself
[Amit Varma]: is I've heard you speak about the importance of being authentic to yourself, especially
[Amit Varma]: in the context of leaving NDTV. And we'll come to that a little later down the line.
[Amit Varma]: But the notion of being authentic to yourself, which is something that really means a lot
[Amit Varma]: to me, because I think no matter what you do, you should not see yourself as a functional
[Amit Varma]: tool that there is a story and I am just fulfilling a function of getting the story out there.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's important to actually, you know, if you have the privilege of doing so to pursue
[Amit Varma]: the kind of stories that mean something to you, that keep you awake at night, like you
[Amit Varma]: said, and that authenticity is important. And when that authenticity comes out, like
[Amit Varma]: podcasts are really the most intimate medium in that sense, which I didn't realize when
[Amit Varma]: I got into it, because you're a voice in somebody's head, you know, and that sense of intimacy
[Amit Varma]: with the audience is incredible. So do you have some thoughts on this? And do you also
[Amit Varma]: therefore just thinking aloud again, feel that moving to Mojo, moving to YouTube, maybe
[Amit Varma]: what has happened over the last four or five years, made this happen more, because now
[Amit Varma]: you're working for yourself, you decide what stories you want to do. So on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have to follow what a corporation may feel is the right thing to do. And on
[Amit Varma]: the other hand, you're not somebody on a TV screen, you're somebody on a mobile phone,
[Amit Varma]: which they're holding in front of their face. So has this made a difference in one how you're
[Amit Varma]: received and two, then in how you view yourself and the kind of work that you do?
[Guest]: So I think the two questions, let me answer both of them separately. I mean, they're linked,
[Guest]: but first on authenticity. This is something I really feel strongly about, right? And it
[Guest]: comes down to even the clothes you wear, you know, how you dress, what you think you need
[Guest]: to look like. And it is perhaps even more important to drive home this message today,
[Guest]: because, you know, because of my work, I am forced to be on certain platforms that I may
[Guest]: have chosen to avoid otherwise. So one of them would be Instagram. I would not be on
[Guest]: Instagram if I didn't, like, I believe that I want to reach all kinds of audiences and
[Guest]: I want to understand all kinds of platforms. So I'm on Instagram. But when I look at Instagram,
[Guest]: I find it completely flattening out an idea of, in particular, how women should look like.
[Guest]: And, you know, there's this sense of performing for your phone camera and pouting at the camera,
[Guest]: putting the filter on, making sure you're shot, you know, you look, you always take
[Guest]: a selfie in the best light. And I'm not saying that, you know, I'm free from all vanities,
[Guest]: but I'm saying that there is a flattening, there is a cookie cutter impact of the body
[Guest]: size of the face, of what you're supposed to project. And there's so much projection
[Guest]: and there's such little grit and there's such little reality that I feel like we're entering
[Guest]: this sort of perilous universe where almost nothing and nobody is real. And yet, paradoxically,
[Guest]: I feel that the people who make the deepest relationships with their audience are the
[Guest]: ones where the audience sees them as real. Right. I think realness and that realness
[Guest]: can just be you being you, whatever that you is, whatever that you is, you know, it, and
[Guest]: I think that, you know, I have many other issues with what she does, but the one person
[Guest]: who was the queen of this was Oprah Winfrey. And I remember thinking this when I was interviewing
[Guest]: her at the Jaipur Lit Fest, that she defied the stereotype. One of the reasons I did not
[Guest]: want to be a presenter in American television when I graduated from Columbia was because
[Guest]: what the presenters I saw were all blondes in black. That's what I call them. There were
[Guest]: white women, blondes dressed in New York black. There was a stereotypical look if you wanted
[Guest]: to be an on-air person. And Oprah with not just the color of her skin, not just for the
[Guest]: size of her body, but also the informality, the loud laugh, the, you know, just, she was
[Guest]: authentic. And I just think that I can't think of too many people on camera who are able
[Guest]: to be authentic, but you will find that between men and women, both those who are authentic
[Guest]: to themselves, with whom you feel that even if I met them at their home, they'd be like
[Guest]: this only, like they are on camera. They wouldn't be different. Those are the people whom strangers
[Guest]: want to give samosas to and say, you know, you become like some everybody's child. And,
[Guest]: and I just find that for me, my ordinariness, by which I mean that I do not know how to
[Guest]: be this gentrified, glamorized cookie cutter, female presence on camera, I think has helped
[Guest]: me build relationships with people because there's a relatability with authenticity.
[Guest]: So that's on authenticity. On Mojo, yes. I do not think that if I worked in an organization,
[Guest]: I would have been allowed to sit in a car and leave and just do, and at the height of
[Guest]: COVID, firstly, I would have been told, we can't take responsibility for you. We can't,
[Guest]: this thing, you can't go, whatever. Secondly, there would have been a resource issue. Thirdly,
[Guest]: there would have been a, no, is it really necessary because who spends money on reporting
[Guest]: anymore? So there would have been so many issues, right? You know, I can't imagine that
[Guest]: if I worked in an organization, even in an organization like NDTV that did encourage
[Guest]: reporting at least in its earlier years, you know, there would have been so many other
[Guest]: complications. So at one level, it's been very liberating and there's a, there's much
[Guest]: greater space to build that intimate relationship between yourself and the audience.
[Guest]: But of course there are, you know, there are other struggles with all of us who are now
[Guest]: independent content creators that, you know, you, I, I was sort of cosetted by an organization.
[Guest]: I was used to sort of, let's say small things like to, to, to produce a prime time show
[Guest]: on television takes about 15 people. We do it with three now, right? One is it's the
[Guest]: magic of technology, but you also adapt to doing a lot more yourself, you know, and you,
[Guest]: you learn new skills. It's at one level, very exciting, but let's not romanticize it. You
[Guest]: do fight for things you never had to fight for. Like? Mostly resources, mostly resources.
[Guest]: I mean, not, you know, and especially when you're at a building stage, right? So like
[Guest]: for me, it's ironic, but like these toughest 16 months of my life, it's, it's, it's probably
[Guest]: been the toughest story I've reported on more than war, more than conflict because because
[Guest]: if it's one length, how long it's lasted to not being able to identify where the danger
[Guest]: will necessarily come from and therefore having no mechanisms to really protect yourself three,
[Guest]: you know, have facing some colossal personal loss in the middle of it all. So in, for many
[Guest]: reasons, it's been probably my toughest, toughest assignment. And yet it's been so rewarding
[Guest]: in terms of how quickly we were able to reflect in our audience size. You know, we, we started
[Guest]: at about in October of 2019 at that time, a YouTube channel, which was just like this
[Guest]: parking lot. I did nothing with it. I had, I think 80,000 subscribers and you know, we're
[Guest]: at 630,000 today and it's all been through COVID. It's just been for our work, nothing
[Guest]: else, not one bit. I haven't spent a paisa on digital marketing, not one paisa, not one
[Guest]: paisa, nothing. It's just pure organic things. So at one level, like all this sort of BS
[Guest]: that people aren't interested, people don't want to watch this. This is not true. In fact,
[Guest]: our numbers begin to fall when we aren't out there reporting. That's when our numbers fall.
[Guest]: The moment we are, you know, where it could be farmers, it could be huntress, it could
[Guest]: be the Delhi riots, which is when we kind of started. It could be the citizenship protests.
[Guest]: And then of course, COVID and we see a spike when we go out and we tell these stories and
[Guest]: we bring them back. It's in peacetime that actually we find it very difficult to grow
[Guest]: our numbers.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So, you know, before we get back to your personal journey, and I keep making these
[Amit Varma]: digressions, so apologies. But before we get back to that, I'm also struck by a strand
[Amit Varma]: that came up when you were earlier giving your two part answer. And the second part
[Amit Varma]: of that was where you spoke about your ethic in terms of approaching the people that you
[Amit Varma]: do stories with that, you know, you don't like sting journalism, for example, and neither
[Amit Varma]: do I, because I think that, you know, the means are never justified by the end that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, even your means should be above board and should respect consent and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So there, I agree with you. Now, my question is about how one approaches the people that
[Amit Varma]: one is doing a story with, especially if it is at a traumatic time. For example, on your
[Amit Varma]: Instagram page, I came across this lovely poem by Varsha and Shair. I think, I hope
[Unknown]: that's how her name is pronounced. And it's called What Happened Yesterday Afternoon.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll just read out the first few lines because I love them so much. What happened
[Amit Varma]: yesterday afternoon, Varsha and Shair. They set my aunt's house on fire. I cried the way
[Amit Varma]: women on TV do, folding at the middle like a five pound note. I called the boy who used
[Amit Varma]: to love me, tried to okay my voice. I said hello. He said Varsha, what's wrong? What's
[Amit Varma]: happened? Stop quote. And the poem continues and it's just beautiful. And this is a dilemma,
[Amit Varma]: right? This is a dilemma for anyone. And this is not just a dilemma in terms of journalism.
[Amit Varma]: It's a dilemma, just in terms of life, that to what extent are you treating people as
[Amit Varma]: a means to an end, instead of relating to them as people itself? How do you approach
[Amit Varma]: that? And I guess this is a sort of career wide thing for you that you know, and I know
[Amit Varma]: obviously that your consent will be paramount for you that you're not thrusting mics in
[Amit Varma]: the face of people at a cremation ground. It's only people who are willing to speak
[Amit Varma]: to you and all of that. But how do you approach this? How hard is it? And sometimes at a fraught
[Amit Varma]: emotional time, like reporting during COVID on any given day must be because it's just
[Amit Varma]: so hellish. How do you approach it?
[Guest]: So, you know, my first encounter with this debate around consent during tragedy, oddly
[Guest]: came during the 26-11 terror strikes when a certain class of viewers, and I emphasize
[Guest]: the word class quite knowingly, was extremely angry with me for interviewing. And I wasn't
[Guest]: the only one doing it. But as often times happens with me, I become somehow emblematic
[Guest]: of a media discussion. Why were we talking to people outside those hotels when their
[Guest]: families were inside? And what was strange, and I remember writing about it later, is
[Guest]: that I had reported on any number of terror strikes, but mostly in those terror strikes,
[Guest]: it was poor people who were killed or injured or maimed, and their families would speak
[Guest]: and the audience never complained. But this was a PLU audience, a People Like Us audience.
[Guest]: And for the audience, it was too close to the bone, and they were extremely uncomfortable,
[Guest]: extremely angry, and they're extremely argumentative about why is this necessary? You people are
[Guest]: vultures, you people are feasting off tragedy, and all the rest. But I would always say,
[Guest]: and I continue to say that even today, I remember interviewing a husband whose wife was inside
[Guest]: the Taj, and he said he wanted to do the interview because maybe she was watching TV. Maybe she
[Guest]: was watching TV. There was somebody else who wanted something else. What I have found,
[Guest]: and the reason I'm bringing this up, is that as uncomfortable as some parts of our audience
[Guest]: may get, with the rawness of tragic moments, of difficult moments, especially of moments
[Guest]: that you think could also be your story one day, I find that most people want to tell
[Guest]: their story. Most people I have ever met in life, yes, there are some people who say,
[Guest]: please turn the camera off. Go away. Please go away. And you go away. Mostly, my way is
[Guest]: to gently ask, would you like to talk? And I would say eight and a half times out of
[Guest]: ten, the answer is yes. And when there are grave tragedies, great losses, great churn
[Guest]: in society, just at that precise moment when you think the world is about to end or things
[Guest]: are so insurmountably difficult, you would be surprised, but everybody wants a personal
[Guest]: history to be recorded. Nobody wants to die or lose somebody as a mere statistic. Everybody
[Guest]: wants to tell their story. It can come from different places. It can come from a place
[Guest]: of sorrow, of anger, of hope, of frustration, but mostly people want to talk. Now, what
[Guest]: should be your emotional tone? Some 25 years later, one of the things is that I never watch
[Guest]: anything I do, because if you play back what you do, you'll just sound weird to yourself,
[Guest]: right? On the odd occasion that sometimes it plays back to you in the middle of a show
[Guest]: or some clip plays, there is something firstly very weird to watch yourself. So I just don't
[Guest]: do it. But of course, you can never reach that, you know, you're never so good that
[Guest]: you look back at everything you do and say, you always think, oh, maybe I could have been
[Guest]: a little softer, or why was I being so loud, or maybe I was too emotional, or I shouldn't
[Guest]: have done that. So you always have a little bit of doubt about the pitch of your tone,
[Guest]: about the questions. You know, so I'll give you a small, small example. Like I edited
[Guest]: it out because it sounded so abrasive, but about the kind of mistakes one can make in
[Guest]: a difficult moment. This is not in the context of COVID. I was interviewing an Afghan parliamentarian
[Guest]: who was deported from India when she landed. And she said, I've come to meet my doctor
[Guest]: and I needed to go to a hospital. And very naturally it came out from my mouth and it
[Guest]: came out wrong. You know, what were you being treated for? Right now, what I meant was,
[Guest]: did you need a doctor in an emergency? And did anyone at the airport, like, were you
[Guest]: in the middle of a medical emergency or were you kind of having some long-term treatment
[Guest]: for which, you know, yes, you needed, you had a doctor's appointment, but there wasn't
[Guest]: an immediate medical crisis. And because of shared experience, I was able to recover and
[Guest]: say in the next sentence, I'm so sorry. What I meant by that was I wanted to understand,
[Guest]: were you having an emergency that needed immediate medical attention? But the sentence was so
[Guest]: intrusive that I edited it. And my point is that the best or the most experienced of us
[Guest]: make mistakes when we are talking, having difficult conversations. And these are extremely
[Guest]: difficult conversations and you will never fully like yourself for how you behave in
[Guest]: them because you will always feel that you could have been a little better, a little
[Guest]: more sensitive, et cetera. It is a skill to draw people out in these times without imposing
[Guest]: on them, right? So there's always that slight amount of self-doubt. However, I will keep
[Guest]: insisting that people have a right to decide whether their stories need to be told. And
[Guest]: history is written and recorded by the testimonies of individual stories. And therefore, you
[Guest]: know, one way of reporting the Kargil war was to talk about the Bofors gun. But another
[Guest]: way to report the Kargil war was to interview Vikram Batra. And that is why Vikram Batra,
[Guest]: and to ask Vikram Batra, aren't you scared? To which he said, yeh dil mange more. To which
[Guest]: is the reason that 20 years later, he is still so iconic, right? Now you could say, why are
[Guest]: you interviewing a soldier? The soldier's in the middle of a war front. Is this the
[Guest]: time to ask him, aren't you scared? In today's age, the same audience that celebrates Vikram
[Guest]: Batra for that interview would shit on me for asking that question, right? Or sections
[Guest]: of that audience. And that's the hypocrisy and the kind of short-sightedness that has
[Guest]: entered our media discourse. I think people must have the right to decide whether they
[Guest]: want to tell their stories. And none of us can judge that. People have the right to say
[Guest]: yes or no. And if they say yes, they have the right to tell their stories. I mean, obviously
[Guest]: a war will come with its own compunctions on how much a soldier can say and how much
[Guest]: you can ask. I don't mean to simplify the example, but just broadly speak.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, it's ultimately all about consent. And if the person telling the story has consented,
[Amit Varma]: then it's kind of silly to blame you for asking the question. The other thing that I feel
[Amit Varma]: is that as long as you're not being inclusive, it's necessary to just keep asking no matter
[Amit Varma]: how banal it feels, because you never know what might emerge. Like I was very moved by
[Amit Varma]: the story you did during COVID of this nine-year-old in Bhivandi, who was, you know, getting on
[Amit Varma]: a bus to go to Azamgarh, and you asked him, what does the COVID virus mean to you? And
[Amit Varma]: he said, it means that I don't get anything to eat. And that's also such a great moment
[Amit Varma]: of show, don't tell, because you ask a question about a virus, but that one answer just reveals
[Amit Varma]: so much about society and about, you know, just so much in that one sentence, which just
[Amit Varma]: becomes a standout moment like that. And, you know, people would otherwise criticize
[Amit Varma]: you for asking a banal question that why are you asking a nine-year-old whether he knows
[Amit Varma]: what the virus is, but you get that moment from that.
[Guest]: I think sometimes you have to ask, you know, the most banal question of all, and I recognize
[Guest]: it because it's been caricatured in memes is what's, you know, like, aapko kaise lagta
[Guest]: hai? Now, I've never actually asked someone aapko kaise lagta hai, but I have said to
[Guest]: them, you know, when you heard this, what was the first thing you thought? Now, it's
[Guest]: a non-complex, non-intellectual question, but people need simple prompts to open up,
[Guest]: right? People don't want to write a PhD thesis or whatever. There's a child getting onto
[Guest]: a bus, right? I'm just asking him, do you know what the virus is? It's completely organic.
[Guest]: Whereas if I had asked him some other question, it would have seemed tutored. He would may
[Guest]: not have given this answer. So I just find that my, you know, to draw people out intimately,
[Guest]: sometimes you just keep it simple. Don't try and show off how profound you are. Too many
[Guest]: of us make that error of, you know, wanting it to be about how much we know, so as to
[Guest]: not appear banal. And I understand that. I understand that there's a pressure that you
[Guest]: don't want to be an also-ran. We all feel that pressure. You know, you want to somehow
[Guest]: be distinct. And if you're asking these simple questions, you don't feel distinct because
[Guest]: you feel like even an intern would ask the same question. Like, I'm sure like maybe there's
[Guest]: a part of you that thinks that, right? Like a kid starting out would also be, but it's
[Guest]: many different skills. It's a skill in, do you bring your camera to the height of the
[Guest]: child? I mean, I have gone mad telling the camera people I work with, don't shoot children
[Guest]: from the top, right? Do you kneel down to the height of the child? Do you talk to the
[Guest]: child playfully, but yet as if he or she is an adult? It's not just the question. There
[Guest]: are multiple skills that, you know, it's, I had a teacher at Columbia. I mean, show
[Guest]: don't tell is one way of putting it. And I had another professor who used to say, you
[Guest]: know, write like you speak only better. And in the same way, you know, you've got to speak
[Guest]: as if it's so casual and natural, but there's a whole set of skills that are going into
[Guest]: that, that are acquired, that are intuitive. It's a mix of a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: And when you do stories like this, how hard is it to sort of not get emotional yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Because just watching this stuff, I sometimes find myself tearing up, right? It's difficult
[Amit Varma]: not to. If you're actually out there reporting, I don't know how I would manage, frankly.
[Amit Varma]: So do you then with practice train yourself to have this extra layer where you kind of
[Amit Varma]: step outside of yourself a little bit and you realize that you don't want that kind
[Amit Varma]: of reaction coming from you. You've just got to be cool and calm and kind of continue doing
[Amit Varma]: what you're doing. Is that something that you've had to do? Because in many of these
[Amit Varma]: difficult moments, you've been calm, you haven't broken down, but at the same time, you're
[Amit Varma]: engaged, you're there, you're not just a blank face. What is that process like? How does
[Amit Varma]: one, you know, evolve what one's approach is towards that?
[Guest]: I don't want to use the word surgical because it's not. Because if you become surgical,
[Guest]: then you're not feeling. And if you're not feeling, then you're not drawing people out.
[Guest]: So it can't be surgical. But I will tell you that in that way, reporting COVID and reporting
[Guest]: military conflict is similar in that you do have to keep one part of your mind to the
[Guest]: sheer, I don't want to say craft, but logistics, right? There has to be. So if in Kargil, it
[Guest]: was how do I get this tape to Delhi? How do I find a place to sleep? How do I get something
[Guest]: to eat? And some of those similar things in COVID, what it does is it one displaces you,
[Guest]: it displaces fear, which is very important in difficult situations. Because if you're
[Guest]: scared yourself, you know, if you're constantly, if I'm going to go into Dharavi, which I,
[Guest]: you know, I remember when the first time I went to Dharavi, people were like, are you
[Guest]: crazy? You're going into Dharavi in the middle of this COVID, what are you doing? So you
[Guest]: have to put these things, you have to take the precautions that you know how to take,
[Guest]: and then you have to leave the fear. So there's that, the fear has to be displaced. The second
[Guest]: thing is that you have to allow yourself to be emotional, but not to a degree where you
[Guest]: lose craft. So it comes back to authenticity. You have to be as you feel in that moment.
[Guest]: But this is where experience counts. Because over the years, I have been in these situations.
[Guest]: It's not my first time, right? I remember I was doing a story on Neelavati, who was
[Guest]: an old woman sitting outside the Bandra railway station in Mumbai, and she'd been abandoned
[Guest]: by her family, and she didn't know how to get back home. And she started sobbing, and
[Guest]: I just couldn't help it. I had to hold her. I had to hold her. At that time, people were,
[Guest]: we didn't know enough to know that it wasn't by surface and whatever, and I had to. She
[Guest]: was an old woman. And we got her onto that train. But I had a 19-year-old producer at
[Guest]: that time. She was just out of college. And she just wouldn't stop crying. You know, she
[Guest]: couldn't film because she was just looking at this, and she was sobbing. Whereas I, because
[Guest]: I have seen so much tragedy and so much distress and so much violence and so many bodies, and
[Guest]: my heart was breaking, and it was breaking enough to be engaged with this woman. But
[Guest]: it was able to have one filter that still allowed me to function. So functionality doesn't
[Guest]: go, though sometimes, very rarely, it does. And in COVID, I can remember two times when
[Guest]: I have lost functionality. One was in the first wave when I was interviewing somebody,
[Guest]: a doctor in Chennai. And the doctor was describing how he had gone to bury his best friend, who
[Guest]: was another doctor. And at that time, because there was so much phobia about, and so much
[Guest]: ignorance and, you know, bad science around COVID, that the neighborhood had stoned the
[Guest]: ambulance that was carrying this doctor's body. And they kind of went from burial ground
[Guest]: to burial ground, and they were not able to do it. And the ambulance was smashed. And
[Guest]: this doctor just broke into tears while he was doing this interview. And he broke into
[Guest]: tears, and I broke into tears. And it just happened, and we ploughed through it. And
[Guest]: the second time was, I was doing this series on how hundreds of government schoolteachers
[Guest]: in Uttar Pradesh had died, because they were sent into enforced election duty. And actually,
[Guest]: of all the mistakes that have taken place by the government and other bodies during
[Guest]: COVID, I feel the strongest about this, because in every other case, whether it's electioneering
[Guest]: or Kumbh Mela or, you know, whatever other Eid celebrations or funeral processions, there
[Guest]: was a certain amount of choice that was exercised. It could be ill-informed choice, but it was
[Guest]: a choice. But these government employees who were forced, not given any agency, I feel
[Guest]: very strongly about it. And I was interviewing this lady and her daughter, who's 15. And
[Guest]: my father had died, I think it had been 10 days. I just recovered from COVID. So maybe
[Guest]: it had been a little longer, maybe two weeks, two weeks or three weeks gap. And I was interviewing
[Guest]: this mother and daughter. And the daughter says to me, well, you know how I feel, because
[Guest]: your father died and my father died. And I just couldn't, like, I broke down like I never
[Guest]: have because the pattern was false. Because my father, whatever my pain is, and I told
[Guest]: her that, that my father was not forced into a situation where he couldn't say no, he did
[Guest]: not get COVID because his choice was taken away. Your father got COVID and died because
[Guest]: his choice was taken. Right. So just that she, even in that loss, you know, saw it the
[Guest]: same way without rancor was very painful. But largely, I would largely, I would see
[Guest]: that it's something internal. It's a threshold. You've got to keep the emotions open because
[Guest]: if you close them, you'll come across as cold. And many people do. And the thing is the camera
[Guest]: catches you. If you're cold, it'll show. But you can't be so distraught that you can't
[Guest]: tell the story. And by the way, this is why it's so difficult. And this is why it can
[Guest]: sound jarring at times to our audience, because it's not easy to get this balance right. And
[Guest]: even now we make mistakes. At least I do. Yeah. I mean, the important thing is if you're
[Amit Varma]: out there, you're going to make mistakes. The important thing is to be out there. Yes.
[Guest]: And say sorry when you make a mistake that you think was a mistake. I never say sorry
[Guest]: when I don't think I've made a mistake. But if I think I've made a mistake, I have no
[Guest]: pride in saying, I could have done that better. You know, I'm sorry. I shouldn't have said
[Guest]: that. But I'm very stubborn about not saying sorry if I don't think I'm wrong. So that,
[Guest]: you know, but yeah, you learn every day, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So let's let's take a quick emotional break. And when we come back, we'll continue
[Amit Varma]: with your personal journey and more talk about this and that.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009 and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com,
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Barkha Dutt about her remarkable
[Amit Varma]: career and of course how journalism is today and where we kind of left off last time is
[Amit Varma]: you had just hit NDTV. And it's almost like you're on the ground floor of an India remaking
[Amit Varma]: itself and of this new media coming up, right when that happens. And just as you know, journalism
[Amit Varma]: changes India changes. So tell me a little bit about that kind of journey. Like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what were your early years at NDTV like, you know, where did you think it was all going?
[Amit Varma]: What were the things that excited you back then? Like, of course, you're at Cargill.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a big story and that excited you. But apart from that, what was the kind
[Amit Varma]: of work that you like to do? If you were then to be asked that, you know, when I'm 49, I
[Amit Varma]: will be this, what would you have said?
[Guest]: So firstly, I think it's very important to understand that much as I disparage the state
[Guest]: of television today, I see myself as a child of television. And you know, what I mean by
[Guest]: that is that when I joined NDTV, most of my colleagues were converts from the print media.
[Guest]: And I was a pretty rare entity who had like basically done college, done mass communication
[Guest]: and then come into like, this was my, it was my first job and I never worked anywhere else.
[Guest]: And I very much saw myself as a sort of child of the visual media, which I continue to do.
[Guest]: I do write today, but I still very much see myself as a visual storyteller. So that was
[Guest]: the first thing. Second was that, as you said, I think the journey of the media in India
[Guest]: has mirrored, reflected, and perhaps altered the story of India as well. Like, I think
[Guest]: all three are true, right? So I start NDTV at a time when there is no, the only private
[Guest]: broadcast journalism that exists is a half an hour capsule made by NDTV for Doordarshan
[Guest]: in English by NDTV in Hindi by Aaj Tak. This is, so I'm literally there at that journey
[Guest]: of, of private television news. And it is obviously coinciding with, you know, the media
[Guest]: playing more of a role in how politics is shaped. This thing that we now take for granted
[Guest]: called narrative, you know, narrative, what is the narrative? What is a politician's story?
[Guest]: In those days, it was reflected in very simple ways that, you know, you had these performing
[Guest]: politicians, you had a Lalu Prasad Yadav and a Farooq Abdullah, who would perform for camera
[Guest]: and then you automatically assume that they were better politicians because they knew
[Guest]: how to perform for camera. So you saw all of these sort of, you know, as I said, media
[Guest]: reflecting India and India getting altered by media and vice versa. And even today, I
[Guest]: sometimes wonder, does media reflect the polarization or did it contribute to creating it? And I
[Guest]: suspect both of it is accurate. So I continue to want to keep one foot in technical production.
[Guest]: So for a long time at NDTV, I wanted to continue to be in what we call the PCR, which is the
[Guest]: back-end control room. I wanted to rotate roles in that. I did sound mixing. I learned
[Guest]: how to edit. I mean, I learned how to edit in Jamia. I continue to be able to edit my
[Guest]: own stories. I was somewhat crazy in that way that I remember when I went to report
[Guest]: the tsunami. In those days, there was no digital editing and we used to do what was called
[Guest]: cut-to-cut editing and it was on a machine and we had a portable editor and my camera
[Guest]: person, Jamia and I, even into a tsunami, we carried our own editing machine so that
[Guest]: we could have full control over what pictures we were sending and, you know, so on. So what
[Guest]: excited me was always the same. It was going out into the field and telling the story.
[Guest]: And I know so many people ask me during COVID, oh, is this Barkha 2.0? And I was like, no,
[Guest]: it's actually Barkha 1.0. I forgot that this is what I love. This is what I love. And yes,
[Guest]: of course, I can't be out every day. So there are days in the middle when I'll be behind
[Guest]: a desk, but I don't like being behind a desk. And I didn't sign up to be a journalist to
[Guest]: be behind the desk. Amongst my earliest and most well-established stories, most significant
[Guest]: stories, Kargil is well-established, but one that is lesser known is in terms of how much
[Guest]: it impacted me. And also as a story that really altered India was the gang rape of a woman
[Guest]: called Bhavri Devi. And now I was this 20-something, fresh out of this liberal cocoon of St. Stephen's
[Guest]: College and the worthiness of Jamia Millia. If you had asked me about my feminism, it
[Guest]: was very borrowed from the West. I read all my German Greers and Gloria Steinem's and
[Guest]: all the rest of that, right? If you asked me what my caste politics were, I would say
[Guest]: like a typically privileged elite that I don't believe in caste. I mean, I still don't believe
[Guest]: in caste, but I recognize today that I can say it. Like for myself, I don't believe in
[Guest]: it. Like if you ask me, what is your caste? I would say, I don't know. I don't have one.
[Guest]: I don't know, etc. But today is that recognition that I can say that because I'm not oppressed
[Guest]: on the basis of my caste. But as a 20-something, I did recognize that. I just had these very
[Guest]: simple-minded notions. And then I am sent in to Rajasthan to report on the gang rape
[Guest]: of this woman who's raped for trying to stop the child marriage of a one-year-old baby.
[Guest]: And among the rapists is the father of the child. And she's still fighting her case.
[Guest]: It's been forever, like 25, almost 25 years. But from that case is born the Vishakha Guidelines.
[Guest]: So we owe to this Dalit woman in a village in Rajasthan, the sexual harassment guidelines
[Guest]: that govern all of India. And she and her decision to go to court, deliver this to us.
[Guest]: And all these big words that we know today, intersectionality and all of this, this was
[Guest]: my education. This was my education. And this is when I discovered that, you know, you'd
[Guest]: ask me early, is it the adventure? Is it telling, you know, being that bridge? But what about
[Guest]: how much it teaches you to unlearn? Every day I abandon something I used to believe
[Guest]: because being a journalist has taught me other things, right? The unlearning is the greatest
[Guest]: gift of journalism. The way it challenges you to rethink your own positions. So Bhavrit
[Guest]: Devi, that story at NDTV really did that for me. What was NDTV like? Look, we were very
[Guest]: young, all of us. And NDTV was a very benevolent, encouraging, almost parental environment.
[Guest]: It was very easy to be a beloved, bright, sometimes errant child in that environment.
[Guest]: And that is what it was like. And the tensions began, as they do even in families, when the
[Guest]: child grows up and develops a personality of their own that is no longer necessarily
[Guest]: the best fit for the way the family has been used to bringing up the child, right? So,
[Guest]: of course, those early years were very heady. And they were heady for a number of reasons.
[Guest]: I think there was genuinely a belief that we were all going to be storytellers. It was
[Guest]: the glory days of television, not just in the resources available to be able to go out
[Guest]: and tell a story, you know, travel budgets, the emphasis on pictures, not the reductionist
[Guest]: talking heads driven sort of journalism, very sort of starry-eyed about journalism will
[Guest]: change the world, all of that, right? I mean, they were just very, very intense, exciting,
[Guest]: educative years. And being a first generation television journalist, I always believed in
[Guest]: the medium. I didn't disparage the medium, like so many people who were in it and disparaged
[Guest]: it, which I never understood. I was like, if you hate it, why are you here? Right? I
[Guest]: mean, my disillusionment with it came much later. Like I think in the beginning, I just
[Guest]: mostly just loved it.
[Amit Varma]: And how much of the disillusionment has to do with content and how much with form, for
[Amit Varma]: example, as the years go by, as it as you know, politics intervenes more and more and
[Amit Varma]: the media landscape changes, there are pressures on what kind of content you can put out there
[Amit Varma]: and what kind of content you are, you can't. But at the same time, in terms of form, also,
[Amit Varma]: did you feel that you were evolving beyond those cliched tropes? Like you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: talking heads on television, or there are even those, you know, talk shows like you
[Amit Varma]: used to host, We The People, where I was a guest three or four times, back in the aughties,
[Amit Varma]: where Smriti Irani got angry at me backstage, because on your show, I think you had asked
[Amit Varma]: me, do you believe in sacred cows? In the context of it was a show on the national anthem
[Amit Varma]: and flag and all that, you asked me, do you believe in sacred cows? And my answer was
[Amit Varma]: the only kind of the sacred cow I believe in is a divine steak on my plate. And Smriti
[Amit Varma]: didn't take nicely to that. But you know, to kind of get back to the question, was that
[Amit Varma]: also a factor that in terms of form, you wanted to expand a little bit that you found that
[Amit Varma]: these particular forms are constricting, and in fact, some of them have become caricatures
[Amit Varma]: of themselves, like talking heads on TV, and you'll have like 15 windows on a Republic
[Amit Varma]: TV screen.
[Guest]: So I have to say that the form was definitely a big part of the ennui for me. But I have
[Guest]: to acknowledge my own culpability in it as well. In the sense that what I mean by that
[Guest]: is that I feel, I don't know that anyone, even my worst critic would ever call me lazy,
[Guest]: but I feel I grew lazy. I feel that. When I put a lens on myself, and I do my own appraisal,
[Guest]: you know, for someone who has the energy to work all the time, it is not clear to me how
[Guest]: I slipped into that space where I became an anchor. I never wanted to be an anchor. I
[Guest]: only ever wanted to be a reporter. And I would keep telling all these young people would
[Guest]: come to NDTV and you know, that all want to be so positively want to be me or be like
[Guest]: me. And I would be like, all I want to be is a reporter and all of you want to be anchors.
[Guest]: But I now understand that organizations had made anchors superior to reporters in what
[Guest]: they were paid, in the time slots they got, in the attention they got from the organization
[Guest]: and the attention they got from the public and the people that magazines chose to do
[Guest]: profiles on and all of that. So everybody wanted to be an anchor. And I think I, the
[Guest]: form definitely started to bore me. But I started, maybe in a phase in my life, there
[Guest]: would still be breakout moments, I would still something would happen and I would take off.
[Guest]: And that never stopped for me. As long as I was, you know, in TV, and even today, it's
[Guest]: it never stopped. But the proportion of time I was spending reporting in the proportion
[Guest]: of time I was spending in the studio changed. And I was spending way too much time in the
[Guest]: studio. And some of it was budget cuts, and you know, channels not wanting to spend that
[Guest]: kind of money anymore. But some of it was, I guess me, I mean, I that's what I'm saying.
[Guest]: I grew, I grew lazy. Like, you know, that's, that's what Anui is, right? Like, you know,
[Guest]: you like it to be stale, but you're kind of drifting along in that staleness. I mean,
[Guest]: in the end, my parting with NDTV was not amicable. But if I were to be today with the benefit
[Guest]: of, you know, I'm calm, and it's all good. And I look at it calmly, I think the mistake
[Guest]: I made was that I should have left a lot earlier, when things were still decent, they were still
[Guest]: friendly, they were still pretty good. But I had clearly outgrown both the organization
[Guest]: in not in a bad way. I've just outgrown it. I was just that old familiar misfit. And the
[Guest]: formats were boring for me. And I needed to go out there much quicker than I did. And
[Guest]: for someone who's quite adventurous, the fact that I remained in the same job for some 18
[Guest]: years, 20 years, I mean, I don't I've now lost count of how many years, but that in
[Guest]: itself is so counterintuitive. And so I should have done that a lot earlier. That was a mistake.
[Guest]: It's sour things. I think it's sour things at both ends.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the disaffection with the form and also growing out of the organization.
[Amit Varma]: But in terms of content, do you feel that there was pressure there? Like you've spoken
[Amit Varma]: about, you know, how you were censored at one point at NDTV, and you didn't like that.
[Amit Varma]: And do you feel that the imperatives for journalists in terms of the kind of stories that they
[Amit Varma]: choose to tell was changing in ways that were not palatable to you?
[Guest]: Look, maybe I recognize today because I'm calmer that there is no completely free newsroom.
[Guest]: That if we think there is in today's India, I don't think that newsroom exists. And therefore
[Guest]: you look for the newsroom that allows you relatively the maximum freedom that you can
[Guest]: enjoy or you break out and you work for yourself. Right. I don't think that there is this, you
[Guest]: know, absolutely free space. For a variety of reasons. But what happened with NDTV and
[Guest]: me, I think was a lot of different things. So I've told you about the form. I told you
[Guest]: about the misfit. Like, I think that, like, I think growing up and becoming your own person,
[Guest]: suddenly it's not the same easy fit. And, you know, you clash on a number of things.
[Guest]: But certainly there were one or two stories that had been sort of, I want to say censored,
[Guest]: but they were not fully blacked out initially. They were argued against. Parts of them were
[Guest]: thrown out. Parts of them had to be argued through. I mean, I remember when there was
[Guest]: this whole focus, for example, on Narendra Modi's, that suit, when Rahul Gandhi had said
[Guest]: suit Puttaki Sarkar. Till it made its way to Parliament, NDTV didn't think we should
[Guest]: report it because it was not their style to, you know, it's his clothes. Why are we commenting
[Guest]: on them? And I felt, you know, it was a legitimate story. But till it actually entered Parliament,
[Guest]: we were not able to, we were not given the go ahead to report it. There was another story
[Guest]: around Robert Wadra and that took a little bit of argument and jousting to get through.
[Guest]: And then finally the surgical strikes happened after the Uri terror attack. And I am at the
[Guest]: international border doing what I love, being in the field, and I'm looking at the consequences
[Guest]: of what's happened at the border. And I get a call from the, from the news desk from a
[Guest]: colleague in Delhi saying that, hey, listen, this whole thing has become quite politicized
[Guest]: because the Congress is now saying to the BGP, we've also done these surgical strikes
[Guest]: and Chidambaram is giving these interviews. So can you get us an interview? Because he's
[Guest]: not agreeing to, our people, people in Delhi have tried, they haven't managed. So I called
[Guest]: Chidambaram who I obviously just by virtue of having been around so long, one knows most
[Guest]: of these people now. And by the way, also in the BGP, it's not only in the Congress.
[Guest]: And then I called him and he said, where are you? I said, I'm at the border. He said, I'm
[Guest]: not going to do an interview with you while you're at the border. So when you get back
[Guest]: to Delhi, you give me a call. So I came back to Delhi. I called him. We did an absolutely
[Guest]: anonymous, in my opinion, boring, unremarkable, 10 minute or 15 minute, I don't remember interview.
[Guest]: And in which he repeated the same thing that the BGP is politicizing the surgical strikes,
[Guest]: et cetera. And, you know, this is not on, there are posters of it in UP and something
[Guest]: basically in particular with the defense minister, if I remember correctly. Why are there posters
[Guest]: of the defense minister? Why is he saying this? I actually thought it was a highly forgettable
[Guest]: interview. The news desk has wanted me to do it. I handed it over and it was supposed
[Guest]: to air in full in my show that night. I had done the interview in the morning and I got
[Guest]: a call basically telling me that, you know, you can't run this interview. Sorry, but you
[Guest]: can't run this interview. And I was like, why can't I run this interview? And they said,
[Guest]: no, because, you know, it's politicizing the surgical strikes. And this is the moment for
[Guest]: us to stand by our army. So I said that, I mean, I said one that I don't think it's an
[Guest]: anti-army interview at all. It's an anti-politics. In fact, it's a pro-army interview in that
[Guest]: sense. And I said, to what extent will we apply this policy? Because the story has clearly
[Guest]: entered the phase of politics. So if we don't run Chidambaram tomorrow, if the BJP says
[Guest]: something, we won't be able to run the BJP. And how many people will we stop? So this
[Guest]: argument to and fro went on. And I said, well, I have to inform Chidambaram that his interview
[Guest]: is not coming. So what should I say? Say we have decided to withhold it for this reason.
[Guest]: So I texted Mr. Chidambaram and I said, I'm really sorry, but the interview will not be
[Guest]: running and it's a decision taken right at the top. It's above my pay grade. And they
[Guest]: believe that this is a politicization of the military strikes. They don't want to report
[Guest]: on. I was flying to New York that night. I'd just written a book and I was going for some
[Guest]: book event. And I was, and then I saw that Amit Shah was holding some press conference
[Guest]: and Rahul Gandhi was holding some press conference. And so my colleague called me and said, you
[Guest]: know, you're going to have to sort this out with the Roy's because how are we going to
[Guest]: cover this story if you're no longer covering politics or what politician is saying? I said,
[Guest]: how can I sort it out? Like, I'm just following instructions here. The next morning, the Indian
[Guest]: Express had a front page story on the fact that Chidambaram's interview had been dropped,
[Guest]: given to them by Chidambaram. I think Chidambaram had said that the anchor sent me this message
[Guest]: saying that it was a decision above her pay grade. I was at this event in New York where
[Guest]: Shashi Tharoor was on the panel and he asked me about it and I had to repeat it and say
[Guest]: it's above my pay grade. I don't, he said, do you agree with it? I said, of course I
[Guest]: would agree with it. No journalist agree with it, but it's not a decision that was in my
[Guest]: hands. I mean, what could I say? That was what I thought was the appropriate thing to
[Guest]: say, trying to be civil, remain loyal to the organization, but at the same time say as
[Guest]: a journalist, I'm uncomfortable with what happened. And then the last sort of crazy
[Guest]: development in this story was that there was an internal email that was sent out, which
[Guest]: basically said that we will not be reporting any political proclamations around this because
[Guest]: we will not be taking a position against the military. And somehow they felt that it was
[Guest]: the same thing. And that email leaked and The Wire published that email. And I don't
[Guest]: know if they thought that I had leaked that email. I don't know what they actually thought
[Guest]: or that I was not organizationally loyal in defending that decision when I was asked about
[Guest]: it externally. But from there onwards, it was a really steep downhill. I just started
[Guest]: feeling uncomfortable. They seemed upset. I was upset. And, you know, my, my, I was
[Guest]: a consultant by then. And because I always had it at the back of my mind that I want
[Guest]: to do something of my own. And my contract was up for renewal in maybe a month or two
[Guest]: months from that time. And basically, when it came up for renewal, they said to me that,
[Guest]: you know, you have too many arguments about about the news. And so therefore, we don't
[Guest]: think that you should be in the daily news space with us. But we'd love for you to continue
[Guest]: to do with the people and another weekend show. And I said that I've not done anything
[Guest]: wrong. I have stood up for a story that I believe in. And I mean, punished for an interview
[Guest]: that I was asked to do by the organization. And so if you feel that I'm not, you know,
[Guest]: if I'm too opinionated for the news space in this organization, I don't want to be.
[Guest]: And so that is how that relationship basically came to a very, very volatile end. And, of
[Guest]: course, after that, for me, the real shock of was to discover that, let's say you descriptively
[Guest]: agreed that I was among India's top 10 journalists. Let's say, hypothetically, I found that every
[Guest]: promoter of other channels met with me very nicely. Three of them offered me detailed
[Guest]: contracts and then withdrew them. And it was a hell of a journey to discover that you could
[Guest]: have been more than a decent journalist, you know, giving your life to journalism. And
[Guest]: basically, you actually could not get an alternative opening. And at first, I thought it was something
[Guest]: to do with the BJP because there was a suggestion that Mr. Modi doesn't like Barkha. So maybe
[Guest]: the promoters are scared. It didn't fully add up because NDTV still existed and the
[Guest]: BJP didn't love NDTV. There were one or two people, not too many. And then I started thinking
[Guest]: that maybe it was just some peers in newsrooms who didn't, you know, who were like, maybe
[Guest]: there was a moment of Schadenfreude. I don't know. And then there was a disastrous experiment
[Guest]: with that Tiranga, Mr. Kapil Sibal back channel. And then finally, I was like, what am I even
[Guest]: doing? I just need to be doing my own thing. I need to give up this crazy, even my heart
[Guest]: is not in it. I had outgrown TV even while I was in it. And I just needed to have the
[Guest]: courage to find my own sort of path. And then that's how, well, here I am. And Mojo was
[Guest]: born and built and still being built. And there was a lot of learning. I mean, for me,
[Guest]: it was like at the height, at the top of my career, I basically went back to the start
[Guest]: line again. And it's fine, it's life, but it teaches you a lot about yourself, about
[Guest]: the profession, about the fraternity, about the medium, about your country. So there's
[Amit Varma]: been a lot of learning in that. So I have like one question coming from two
[Amit Varma]: different directions, but the same question. And one direction is just looking at, say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, after NDTV lets you go, and you've spoken about it eloquently elsewhere, also
[Amit Varma]: how these all these different people approach to you, and they've given you a time slot,
[Amit Varma]: and they've spoken about the show, and everything's been agreed, and then suddenly they just turn
[Amit Varma]: back, right? And there, the thought that strikes one is that the imperatives for big media
[Amit Varma]: houses might make it difficult to go against whatever the political dispensation of the
[Amit Varma]: day is the way things are. And even if it isn't the case that say Modi or Amit Shah
[Amit Varma]: have said ki isko mat lo, still, as you know, was famously said during the emergency, that
[Amit Varma]: the media when asked to bend, instead chose to crawl. And it's kind of a similar thing
[Amit Varma]: that preemptively these people just decide ki panga nahi lene ka hai, isko nahi lene
[Amit Varma]: hai. And they kind of do that. And the, like the first part of the question that emerges
[Amit Varma]: from there is that, therefore, can there can there be an independent future for big media?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, every media house will also have interests elsewhere, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: a newspaper, but you'll have a chemical factory, chemical factory pe IT raid hogaya, toh that's
[Amit Varma]: kind of the end of that. And that's the way the incentives go. And it's very difficult
[Amit Varma]: to fight against that. And therefore, all the people that you see kind of fighting against
[Amit Varma]: that today are the brave independent establishments, like the scrolls and wires and what you do,
[Amit Varma]: where they just don't have so much leverage, of course, they can pack you up and put you
[Amit Varma]: in jail on whatever charge, but you're presumably too small for that. So that's one angle I'm
[Amit Varma]: coming from. The other angle I'm coming from is that big media just because of technology
[Amit Varma]: and the way people discover content and filter content and consume content has become become
[Amit Varma]: redundant anyway, you don't need those particular gatekeepers, you don't need those particular
[Amit Varma]: platforms as a way of bringing creators and audiences together, or of being the middleman
[Amit Varma]: through who the revenue comes. Technology has changed all of that. And I don't, I don't
[Amit Varma]: think big media has figured that out yet. So the question that I'm coming at from these
[Amit Varma]: two directions is, that is big media inevitably dying then?
[Guest]: Let me answer the second one first, you know, one learning in COVID has been exactly this,
[Guest]: that technology has been so disruptive, that actually, if you have a reasonable understanding
[Guest]: of certain production barometers, which I do, because I did two masters in establishing
[Guest]: shows. So what I mean by that is that if you if you see the programs on Mojo, they will
[Guest]: not look like a Zoom call. So there will be some effort put into lighting, into sound,
[Guest]: into graphics, you know, they may not be what we, you know, they may not be at the top scale
[Guest]: of what I want. And as I grow, I hope to keep improving that but there will be an effort
[Guest]: to professionalize the look. But as I told you, what used to take 15 people to make an
[Guest]: hour of live streaming, is now done by three people. I have even done shows where sometimes,
[Guest]: you know, it's been a Sunday, like the one I'm talking to you on, suddenly I have to
[Guest]: do something, I'll come from my house into my basement office, and I can toggle my own
[Guest]: show, just because I know the software, you know, I can toggle it, I can take the banners,
[Guest]: I can take the graphics, and I can anchor while doing all of this. If you had asked
[Guest]: me this, like when I was in NDTV, I would say it's not possible, it's not possible.
[Guest]: But the other thing is that, you know, if what what has happened, as we all get used
[Guest]: to what, and this is a very strange thing that has happened during COVID, is because
[Guest]: virtual became so normalized. So if earlier, there might be somebody who chose to be mean
[Guest]: about the fact that you weren't sending them an OB van or a live view camera unit, today
[Guest]: would actually, you would not be considered smaller, or, you know, shoot, you know, bootstrapped,
[Guest]: you said, here's the link, join us on this link. Nobody thinks like that anymore, right?
[Guest]: I think, and the third thing is that the power of storytelling is now what sets you apart.
[Guest]: So big media with all its resources, and you know, some of my, some of my, when every time
[Guest]: I say this, I get a pushback on Twitter, and I say it, I continue to repeat it, because
[Guest]: I believe it. I believe big media flunked the first COVID, they flunked it, right? They
[Guest]: just kept interviewing doctors, the same doctors, the same doctors, I'm not saying that they
[Guest]: weren't some local city reporters who were exceptions, I'm saying largely the trend was
[Guest]: big media was too terrified to step out into the lockdown and report the story. And therefore,
[Guest]: people like me, you know, another person who I think is just a fabulous, he's a photographer,
[Guest]: is Praveen Jain, he works with the print, you know, three, four people like this, whom
[Guest]: I can cite who just went out there, the people who went out there, it actually just after
[Guest]: that did not matter whether they were in organizations of one or four, they were making more impact
[Guest]: than all of these big corporate organizations. So technology, plus passion, plus effective
[Guest]: storytelling equalized that opportunity. So yes, I do think that if, if independent media
[Guest]: is supported either directly by audiences, or advertising learns to shift to it, I do
[Guest]: think that big media is a slowly getting redundant, almost there. The only time it has an advantage
[Guest]: over independent media is when something colossal happens. And you need 40 things. You know,
[Guest]: let's say that, God forbid, the plates went into the Twin Towers, you know, you'd need
[Guest]: scale to be able to tell. So we don't have scale. Yet, I think I reported COVID on a
[Guest]: scale that no big media house did, you know, the kilometers, the states, the, you know,
[Guest]: so you have to find, I think there are ways to do it. I think there are ways to compete.
[Guest]: And if you look at YouTube numbers, you'll find the small media and big media are competitive
[Guest]: in numbers. And it actually just depends show to show interview to interview, story to story.
[Guest]: So that's the first part. Your first part of your question was the political environment.
[Guest]: And I do want to talk a little bit about that, right? So I do think that there is a courteous
[Guest]: being more loyal than the king environment. And it is a bit like, you know, when asked
[Guest]: to bend, they crawled, etc. So certainly, yes, I was, I mean, I, like, they were time
[Guest]: slots, salaries, the number of people that I needed, all of it, with multiple people
[Guest]: who then took it back, some saying, you know, it's a bit risky for us, etc. And, frankly,
[Guest]: I mean, I've never, I actually used to know Mr. Arun Jaitley reasonably well in the course
[Guest]: of individual, I said to him one day, that, you know, your party may not like me, but
[Guest]: for your party to try and take away my right to work is absolutely not acceptable. And,
[Guest]: and he said, why do you think it's my party? You think that we have the time to call individual
[Guest]: organizations and say, hire so-and-so and don't hire so-and-so? And if that's the case,
[Guest]: and he argued it out with me, and I didn't have perfect answers. He said, how do you
[Guest]: explain so-and-so is still around and so-and-so is still around? And, you know, the BGP doesn't
[Guest]: like them either. And you know that. And I had no good answers to it. And then finally,
[Guest]: I told him, I said, no, it's the environment, right? So even if you're not making those
[Guest]: calls, there are people who feel that if I take this person, it's too much. But if I
[Guest]: would evaluate it, honestly, today, I would say it's partly the environment, definitely.
[Guest]: And it's partly our fraternity. Unfortunately, we are a divided, extremely competitive, small
[Guest]: hearted fraternity. And we enjoy when somebody who we compete with, we think is down and
[Guest]: out or one less person to compete with. Why would I allow my competitor into my newsroom?
[Guest]: He'll come take away my slot. Let's be honest. I mean, it's a combination, I believe, of
[Guest]: both. And for myself, I fault myself for chasing that television chimera when I knew that it
[Guest]: was done for me. I knew it before I had that final parting with NDTV. If I had just been
[Guest]: more authentic to myself, I would have probably left on better terms. I would have left at
[Guest]: a more, you know, earlier, I would have had more years to build Mojo, all of that. So
[Guest]: of course, it's, you know, all of it is simultaneously true.
[Amit Varma]: Since you, you know, we got back to talking about authenticity, being authentic to yourself,
[Amit Varma]: there's another kind of aspect that comes to mind. And one aspect is, of course, you're
[Amit Varma]: moving from one form to the other. And you are kind of doing the kind of stories you
[Amit Varma]: want to do. Now, earlier, you spoke about performative politicians, which was very much
[Amit Varma]: a thing that I remember from the 90s. And one of the things that you know, you obviously
[Amit Varma]: encountered a lot is politicians who were playing to a certain script on camera, but
[Amit Varma]: were completely different off camera. And therefore, everything that they are presenting
[Amit Varma]: on television, and therefore, everything that you're showing off them on television is in
[Amit Varma]: a sense constructed. It is a sort of a battle of narratives that is playing out there and
[Amit Varma]: off screen, everything is kind of completely different. So how does this affect the way
[Amit Varma]: that you look at the sort of storytelling that is going on? Because at some level, even
[Amit Varma]: when you're chasing a story, you're constructing a narrative of it in your head, which is very
[Amit Varma]: much of course, shaped and limited by what we ourselves are. But then I mean, if you're
[Amit Varma]: authentic to ourselves, that's perfectly fine. We just put in the best faith effort that
[Amit Varma]: we can. But when our subjects are politicians, when you see that, you know, they are one
[Amit Varma]: thing on screen and another off screen, then what is the value of telling that story which
[Amit Varma]: is on the screen? You know, how do you kind of get past that?
[Guest]: I mean, I have to confess that I, I have had to, I won't say I've given up reporting on
[Guest]: politics because you can't in this country, it's a deeply political country. But you know
[Guest]: that that conventional form of political journalism, one, I think I don't understand data and caste
[Guest]: in the in the way that so many other people do. And I think without that understanding
[Guest]: and without that love, you can't really get into the underbelly of the electoral process.
[Guest]: And that leaves the sort of more cosmetic interview format with these politicians, right?
[Guest]: I do it. I'm not saying I never do it. But it's not interesting to me. It's not especially
[Guest]: interesting. It's not especially challenging. And mostly for that reason that there's very
[Guest]: little discovery in it, right? So it's so you, you almost do it because it's something
[Guest]: in the news. Sometimes there are characters that are interesting to people. So for example,
[Guest]: if you know, Tamil Nadu has this new finance minister for a while, he's interesting because
[Guest]: he's, he's interesting for that context. You know, he's having some battle with Sadhguru.
[Guest]: He's a believer in a Dravidian party. So it's a very specific, finite context, right? But
[Guest]: there's very little discovery. I also think I'm bad at it. Like, I consider myself a,
[Guest]: you know, a very good storyteller. But the one thing that I don't tell interestingly
[Guest]: is politics. I don't know how to make it interesting. And what happened was that, you know, when
[Guest]: I was in NDTV, in mainstream media, the hierarchy was so tilted towards political journalism,
[Guest]: and you kind of felt that you couldn't be very much if you weren't going to cover politics.
[Guest]: And so there was always this pressure. And it was also a male-female thing, because,
[Guest]: you know, men were reporting politics and, you know, there was that pressure that you
[Guest]: felt for yourself. And I, and I tried, but I frankly find it, I won't say boring, but
[Guest]: I would say unexciting. So I agree with you. I think there's very little discovery possible
[Guest]: in political journalism, especially in India, where, unlike, let's say, the Washington
[Guest]: Post, where I'm a columnist, you know, you had spoken earlier about, and I didn't address
[Guest]: that about the corporate ownership of media. Either your institutions have to be so free
[Guest]: that Jeff Bezos has no say in what Washington Post writes. And one of the reasons for that
[Guest]: is that Jeff Bezos' companies are not controlled by the government, you know, how his business
[Guest]: grows. So here, it's a very complicated thing. One of the reasons that corporates are scared,
[Guest]: and I'm not defending them, is that governments can control the outcome or the future of that
[Guest]: chemical plant, or, you know, that fertilizer plant, or someone who needs a license, etc.
[Guest]: So they will then use the media either as prestige or vanity or influence. And the moment
[Guest]: they're using it is that you're never going to be institutionally free. And without institutional
[Guest]: freedom, I don't know if there's an interesting way to report politics. The only other interesting
[Guest]: way to report politics is one that I'm weak at, which is to use data or caste, and I'm
[Guest]: weak at both of them. So I personally, if you will see, I don't do that much political
[Guest]: journalism in the way that I once used to, because I've recognized it not to be my strong
[Guest]: suit.
[Amit Varma]: And you mentioned Sadhguru a little while and I was I was kind of searching for the
[Amit Varma]: work that you've done online. And I came across this really old interview of yours with Sadhguru,
[Amit Varma]: which I chose not to click on. Kindly do not be offended by that. It's not because of you,
[Amit Varma]: it's because of him. But the question here is that in the course of your work, you come
[Amit Varma]: across and I don't know if you consider him unsavory, but I certainly do. But in the course
[Amit Varma]: of your work, you'll often have to interact with many unsavory people that you would otherwise
[Amit Varma]: not want to interact with. And of course, doing what I do as a little labor of love,
[Amit Varma]: I have the luxury of not inviting unsavory people on my show. But you won't always have
[Amit Varma]: had that, especially when you were at NDTV or especially if you have the imperative that
[Amit Varma]: if something is newsworthy, if it is in the news, I have to do it, I have to kind of cover
[Amit Varma]: all of those, even if I personally find the idea of talking to this person abhorrent.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one deal with that? And is it easier now that you are on your own and you
[Amit Varma]: can pick and choose who you talk to and so on?
[Guest]: It is much easier now. It is much easier now because it's only my decision. And I'm not
[Guest]: always consistent with this because one part of me feels that we can't just be interviewing
[Guest]: people we like, right? I like such few people. I'll have no interviews. So in a genuine way,
[Guest]: I like such few people, right? So the point is, but more seriously, I don't think our
[Guest]: subjective likes and dislikes should determine who we talk to. That said, I do believe the
[Guest]: interview format in particular is a format that civilizes and mainstreams. And I can
[Guest]: tell you two interviews that I have refused to do. One is of Hafiz Saeed, which was offered
[Guest]: to me. I said, there's no way I'm going to interview him. I can imagine doing a narrative
[Guest]: ground reportage driven, this is the headquarters of Hafiz Saeed. And in that context where
[Guest]: I can provide context, maybe getting two short soundbites from him, because there would be
[Guest]: an opportunity to place him in a narrative. But I find the interview format extremely,
[Guest]: extremely civilized, right? And therefore, I do not believe that at least I have it in
[Guest]: me to call somebody for an interview that keeps shouting at them and saying, oh, you're
[Guest]: a disgusting person. Like, I don't think that I've been brought up like that. However, sort
[Guest]: of South Delhi elite that sounds. So I said no to him and I have stubbornly refused. And
[Guest]: I don't know how long I can carry this on to interview anybody from the Taliban. And
[Guest]: I have been extremely uncomfortable. Even before they took over Kabul, I saw the spokespeople
[Guest]: on, you know, on these channels. I find it extraordinary that these, these hate mongering
[Guest]: anchors who, you know, will vilify any Indian Muslim who has a slightly cauterian view to
[Guest]: theirs will give this respect to the Taliban spokesperson. And I don't know if this is
[Guest]: a logical position for me to take, because, you know, they are now the government in Afghanistan.
[Guest]: Now, am I going to say that this is a government that I will never interview because these
[Guest]: are areas I do report on. So these are not easy decisions. I certainly think that the
[Guest]: interview format is a form of legitimacy, mainstreaming, civility. But equally, I think
[Guest]: that you can't just interview people you like. You have to interview people who are either
[Guest]: newsy or interesting or relevant. And Taliban is relevant, but how do you shake off the
[Guest]: fact that they're terrorists? So, you know, I mean, the honest answer is every day I just
[Guest]: take a subjective, that's the freedom of being on your own, right? You just take the decision
[Guest]: that you're comfortable with, if your audience understands. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of ironic that you mentioned how all these Hindu right-wing anchors, you
[Amit Varma]: know, will speak to them and, you know, they actually secretly want to emulate or try to
[Amit Varma]: emulate everyone they claim to hate. Like they'll say they hate Pakistan, but they want
[Amit Varma]: to make India Hindu Pakistan. They'll say they hate Nehru, but all of Modi's top-down
[Amit Varma]: economic thinking is directly from there. They'll say they hate Indira, but that authoritarian
[Guest]: streak and crush everything is directly from there. Ditto Sanjay Gandhi and ditto Taliban.
[Guest]: Freud would have a great time with this because there's so much kind of, it seems like subconscious
[Guest]: desire almost, right? To be what you loathe or claim to loathe, kind of, because you felt
[Guest]: rejected by it or benchmarked against it. Or, I mean, you know, the pushback against
[Guest]: elites globally, I think it's partly explained by that sense of having once been excluded
[Guest]: by it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, let's come to Mojo now. I mean, we can, of course, talk about Tiranga, but very
[Amit Varma]: briefly, that is that unsavoury incident where you worked with Kapil Sibal and you stood
[Guest]: up for some employees.
[Guest]: It was a mistake. Yeah, yeah. Everybody told me at that time that, you know, you need to
[Guest]: stop fighting and you're going to think you won't get along with anybody. And I said,
[Guest]: I said, look, it's not that. I mean, I've had, I worked in two places. It's easy to
[Guest]: caricature this. I've explained at great length my parting with NDTV and with Sibal, it was
[Guest]: the kind of naivete, you know, there were a bunch of decent people. We all said we're
[Guest]: not going to be these Congress people. Frankly, we had no quarrel over the Congress. We criticized
[Guest]: the Congress pretty much every day that we were there when we needed to. And I had to
[Guest]: speak because there were 200 kids who weren't being paid. And the result was that unsavoury
[Guest]: thing. It was a mistake. And like I told you, I think it came from this disbelief that as
[Guest]: a child of television, really, I couldn't do television anymore in India. Like, I think
[Guest]: I was so shocked initially by having to, it took me time to internalize that I'm, I Barkha
[Guest]: Dutt, a child of television, I'm never going to be on TV again. And I think that till I
[Guest]: went through that Tiranga experience, I had not internalized that. Having internalized
[Guest]: that now, I'm calm, but I wasn't calm then and that made me make mistakes. Okay, so that's
[Amit Varma]: Tiranga. So tell me about Mojo, because you know, when I look back on the last 16 months
[Amit Varma]: since COVID, really, it's been a great learning experience for me in terms of new media and
[Amit Varma]: what creators can really do, where I've been watching tons of stuff on YouTube by independent
[Amit Varma]: bloggers and whatever. And one of the things I've kind of realized is that just the way
[Amit Varma]: that in the aughties, blogs freed you from the convention of written journalism, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, blogs, if you were a blogger, you did not have to conform to the news cycle,
[Amit Varma]: you could write something that was that didn't fit within 800 words, it could be 80 or 8000.
[Amit Varma]: You had freedom of style, you had all of that, and different people used it to find their
[Amit Varma]: voice. And I find that much more in the audio visual medium. And I would imagine that carries
[Amit Varma]: through to anything creators do, including creators slash journalists like yourself.
[Amit Varma]: So when you were forming Mojo, what was your conception of what Mojo can be like, did you
[Amit Varma]: have any role models for Mojo that hey, look at the work these people are doing that they're
[Amit Varma]: breaking past these forms and formulas and conventions and so on. And from that initial
[Amit Varma]: conception of Mojo, is your current conception of it different because of what you might
[Amit Varma]: have gone through in these COVID months, for example?
[Guest]: So I mean, you know, it was actually many years ago that I first thought and that's
[Guest]: when I first became a consultant for NDTV that I do something like Huffington Post.
[Guest]: In my simple minded way, I didn't really understand Huffington Post, but I saw one Ariana Huffington
[Guest]: being able to create this sort of, you know, content driven thing. And I was like, Oh,
[Guest]: I could do something like that. But I didn't really understand at that time that Huffington
[Guest]: Post didn't pay the people who contributed to it. I hadn't examined it that carefully
[Guest]: and all of that. When Mojo was conceptualized, firstly, everybody, this is the really irritating
[Guest]: thing. Everybody thinks Mojo means mobile journalism. Mojo just means magic. It's like
[Guest]: the song, right? Like, I don't know. It's like, anyway. But I had a few things I was
[Guest]: clear on. And a lot of people argued that I was wrong. And I actually think that my
[Guest]: instinct on this was right. So if you see most digital platforms, typically do text
[Guest]: and then they do video. And video comes second. And one of the reasons is video is more complicated.
[Guest]: It's more expensive. It takes more people, etc. I was very clear that I was going to
[Guest]: be a video first platform. That was the first thing. And the second thing I was very clear
[Guest]: about is that I needed to find something that would pay the bills, right? So how was I going
[Guest]: to pay the bills? And it came to me that I need to do something somewhat in the field
[Guest]: of journalism, but not necessarily conventional journalism that will help me create some kind
[Guest]: of resource funding. So even before Mojo was born, I created this, created and curated
[Guest]: this gender festival called We The Women. It was the only way, you know, approximate
[Guest]: way of using We The People without getting copyrighted. So I took We The Women and we
[Guest]: started an annual festival at Mehboob Studio in Bombay. And the idea was somewhat influenced
[Guest]: by Tina Brown, whose sessions I had attended in New York as a speaker who used to run something
[Guest]: called Women In The World. And what I saw was some, she described it as journalism on
[Guest]: stage. And I found that a very interesting concept where you had the skills of the interview,
[Guest]: but you also had the editorial craft needed to read a set of conversations and create
[Guest]: that light and shadow, but the energy of a live audience. And I used to find it a very
[Guest]: magical thing. And I thought, Oh, maybe I can do something like this in India where the glamorous
[Guest]: person and the grassroots person is equal. And if we could get them on stage together
[Guest]: as equal people in the speaker's lounge, how interesting would that be? And so that's how
[Guest]: We The Women was born. We found that, you know, I'm a lousy sort of marketer. So I like
[Guest]: a lot of people that have made, you know, done more with it than I've been able to,
[Guest]: but we found that there were sponsors willing to back it. We started with We The Women and
[Guest]: Mojo was really almost like this parking spot for We The Women videos while I was still
[Guest]: thinking I'll do TV one day. So We The Women was born. And then in the October of 2019,
[Guest]: when I finally said, okay, now this is my life. By this time, I was clear that I needed
[Guest]: to go back to being a reporter. And that is what Mojo was going to be about. And it was
[Guest]: going to be about putting people first. And it was going to be about issues that either
[Guest]: mattered to people, as I imagine that they matter to people, or issues that people didn't
[Guest]: know about, but would matter to them if they knew about them. And about people who did
[Guest]: not have a voice to amplify their stories. So this was broadly it. And, you know, it
[Guest]: was a, in my mind, it had two motives. One, returning news to the people. And two, going
[Guest]: to where the story is. As often as you can, go to where the story is. Don't sit behind
[Guest]: the table and do a story. These were the two guiding principles. And we didn't know that
[Guest]: COVID was coming then. So when Mojo started, we had the citizenship legislation protests
[Guest]: and the student unrest. And, you know, we were deep into that. Then came the Dehti riots.
[Guest]: We were deep into that. And then came COVID. And we were deep into that. And so we stuck
[Guest]: to that conception of Mojo. But what's happened is that I've been so busy reporting that I
[Guest]: have not had time to pause and build. And I would really like to build this beyond myself.
[Guest]: I don't, this is not a Barkha Dutt channel. This is, hopefully, will be a platform for
[Guest]: journalists who want to go to where the story is and pick up these kind of issues. So that's
[Guest]: where I am. So I won't say the conception has changed, but it's got solidified. It's
[Guest]: got reinforced. Even the way our audience reacts, they react better to when we go out
[Guest]: to tell a story. And anyway, that's what we love doing. So it's a good fit right now between
[Guest]: what the audience wants and what we want to do.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And just thinking aloud, there seems to be this sort of trade-off that must be
[Amit Varma]: a complicated one, the trade-off between scale and authenticity. That on the one hand, every
[Amit Varma]: financer would tell you that, hey, why don't you scale this thing and you can make a lot
[Amit Varma]: of money. And obviously, you do want the platform to be bigger and bigger and keep embracing
[Amit Varma]: the values that it does. But at the same time, it gets diluted. The more you scale it, because
[Amit Varma]: right now, it's got a particular identity. You know what you get that it's Barkha out
[Amit Varma]: in the field doing stories in her distinctive style, and everyone who watches it watches
[Amit Varma]: it for you. And if that gets diluted, what might happen is that the numbers might go
[Amit Varma]: up, but the engagement might come down because the level of intimacy will therefore be lower.
[Amit Varma]: So is this a trade-off that you've thought about that you actually had to confront and
[Amit Varma]: say that I actually have a choice between taking a route that helps me to stay true
[Amit Varma]: to myself without any compromises. But on the other hand, I could make a lot of money,
[Amit Varma]: you know?
[Guest]: It's such a great question. And it's not even about money. Like, see, I'm a bit defensive.
[Guest]: You know, we're not American in that way. The Americans never apologize for being individual
[Guest]: centric organizations, right? So like Tina Oprah, Tina Brown, even if they're television
[Guest]: anchors, there's no apology for the cult of personality. Whereas in India, thinking is
[Guest]: not like that, right? We are also groomed to be somewhat squeamish about, oh, no, it's
[Guest]: not just my channel. So there's one that I think our culture, our communication culture
[Guest]: does allow for these solo centric entities. The other thing is, I genuinely, even if it
[Guest]: did, I genuinely do want to have something that I create that, I mean, it's too grand
[Guest]: to say that outclassed me. So I want to say that is more, that is me, but more than me.
[Guest]: So I want it to be me, but it has to be more than me. So just like I think my COVID work
[Guest]: or my Cargill work is more than me, it's me, but it's more than me. There has to be, you
[Guest]: know, it, I would love if I could curate something effectively or mentor something or intubate
[Guest]: something effectively that it has these values, but it has a few other people too. Now I have,
[Guest]: I've been very, I'm not a conservative status quo person at all, but I have been extremely
[Guest]: incremental with Mojo. I've been extremely, almost frugal with how I have approached it.
[Guest]: And sometimes I wonder if I've done the right thing. I look at all these, you know, massive
[Guest]: media startups in the digital space, well-funded, they have 50, 60 reporters and, you know,
[Guest]: here it's me. And I keep wondering sometimes, there are days when you think, you know, was
[Guest]: the approach right? But I, I still think that the baby steps are okay. I don't know. I think
[Guest]: you have a point that you dilute your authenticity by becoming something all purpose. So I think
[Guest]: we're still looking for that formula where we're still very much the imprint of the values
[Guest]: that I think define me, but are able to distribute them a little bit more. I don't know if that
[Guest]: makes any sense. Also, I have to recognize with, with modesty that there are audiences
[Guest]: that my grammar doesn't speak to, you know? So for example, our YouTube analytics tells
[Guest]: us that our maximum audience is between the ages of 25 to 45, right? Now they're used
[Guest]: to a different grammar. I don't, I don't have, and that's why I find that in peacetime they
[Guest]: don't watch. So if there's a crisis, they want to see what I'm, they want to see me
[Guest]: go and tell that story. But in between the crisis, what do we tell them? What do we do?
[Guest]: And we haven't, you know, we, we, we're searching for the answer to that question. And I think
[Guest]: your point is great. I don't have a perfect answer to it.
[Amit Varma]: No, but you should not let that get you down because we are lurching from crisis to crisis.
[Amit Varma]: So what peacetime? There will always be a crisis. Don't worry about that. My other question
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, you mentioned that, you know, you, you did the story in Bandra with a 19
[Amit Varma]: year old producer. And, you know, obviously I'm guessing a young startup, a lot of young
[Amit Varma]: people work with you. What is the difference that you find in the young people who are
[Amit Varma]: starting out in journalism today, as opposed to say, 20 years ago, you know, because one,
[Amit Varma]: they are much more exposed to different sets of values from the West and are, have received
[Amit Varma]: much more exposure to other kinds of journalism, including best practices elsewhere. And two,
[Amit Varma]: they would be much more hip with the technology. The technology would be like an extension
[Amit Varma]: of what they are doing and not something that they have to spend effort learning, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so to say. So is there something that you noticed there that gives you hope?
[Guest]: Okay. So I met all kinds of young people, right? So I don't want to give an answer that
[Guest]: generalizes because I've had two sets of experiences. So one is that kind of hungry youngster who
[Guest]: knows the technology, but they don't necessarily know the content. So the struggle then is
[Guest]: that they know the technologies, they know how to do an Insta reel and they know how
[Guest]: to do a story and they know how to shoot with their phones and they like, they have a visual
[Guest]: grammar, but they don't follow news. They're not journalists. And you're not sure why they're
[Guest]: in journalism because journalism is not what excites. The challenge I think is that journalism
[Guest]: is a gentrified profession. So you're not always getting, sometimes you do, and it's
[Guest]: a hit and miss and you got to go through the attrition of people coming, going, your misjudging,
[Guest]: misjudging you until you slowly build a team that you love and that loves you back. But
[Guest]: I will say that people are entering this profession for the wrong reasons. In my opinion, the
[Guest]: wrong reasons. I'm not an Oracle, but in my opinion, the wrong reasons. And it goes back
[Guest]: to where our conversation started. They're not necessarily passionate. They're not necessarily,
[Guest]: this is not what they live and breathe. This is not what excites them. This is almost glamorous
[Guest]: or it's interesting for a bit, or it's what they want to do before they study a little
[Guest]: more. It's a rites of passage. So it's, it's not always easy. I had thought that the younger
[Guest]: a team I have, the more they're going to teach me the technology and I, you know, but I was
[Guest]: surprised to find, and this is where I find this sort of the Instagramification of our
[Guest]: lives so frightening that while we know how to put on a camera and dance before it or
[Guest]: wear a sari before it or do whatever performance art before it, it doesn't automatically translate
[Guest]: into using it to tell a story. So it's, it's, there's no one truth. So there's some very
[Guest]: hungry, very bright, very brilliant people. And many of them are from the smaller towns
[Guest]: of India. There's this real hunger in them. There's an aspirational sort of this thing,
[Guest]: but there's also a whole bunch of them who are just exploring. It's a kind of, let's
[Guest]: see what this is about because it's no longer an alternative profession, right? There was
[Guest]: a time when this was an alternative profession. It drew a certain level of passion and eccentricity.
[Amit Varma]: It's tougher to find that. Yeah. And it's, it's actually the small town hungry people
[Amit Varma]: that I've had, I'd have a lot more hope for, especially, and especially because the technology
[Amit Varma]: just makes it possible for them to kind of do their own.
[Guest]: I mean, there's such fantastic, even in COVID, like some of the best stories that like the
[Guest]: tip-offs rather not the stories was, you know, you just find some young person in some small
[Guest]: town who would like these mass bodies. I mean, like the, which became a singular obsession
[Guest]: to go to villages in UP at the banks of the Ganga. The, the first tip-off came to me from
[Guest]: a young, young boy who lived in, you know, in Unao, in Uttar Pradesh. And he just, I'm
[Guest]: waiting for my number for me and he WhatsApp me and he's like, this is what I saw. Do you
[Guest]: want to come and see? And I went and that, you know, so in some of these smaller towns,
[Guest]: the hunger, the, the, the willingness to take a risk, the complete absence of privilege
[Guest]: and yet the sheer passion to, to do this, it gives you a lot of hope. It really does
[Guest]: give you a lot of hope. I feel less hopeful for people who are just experimenting with
[Guest]: this, you know, who's just experimenting with it on their way to the next degree. That is
[Guest]: a little bit frustrating. And I know I sound like, you know, for the kids who are hearing
[Guest]: this and sound like, Oh, you're a real RPG boomer, et cetera. You know, you get these
[Guest]: days the backlash comes quite swiftly, but this is what I see. Like there is this kind
[Guest]: of self-indulgent experimental, there is that bunch also. And then there's a really hungry,
[Guest]: passionate bunch. And for a startup like, like mine, with the emphasis is so much on
[Guest]: the storytelling and going out there. It's tough. We keep looking to find those kinds
[Guest]: of people, you know, and we have some, definitely we have some, and that gives you a lot of
[Amit Varma]: hope.
[Amit Varma]: So speaking of, you know, storytelling, going out there, tell me a little bit about the
[Amit Varma]: COVID experience, because you've spoken about how in the early days after the lockdown,
[Amit Varma]: the first day you take a drive to the UP border, you see what's happening there. Then you go
[Amit Varma]: to the Punjab border, then you start traveling and doing stories, but every night you come
[Amit Varma]: back to Delhi. So you have to plan for that. And then you decide that screw it, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's no point doing this, we're just going to travel. And then you initially you decided
[Amit Varma]: Delhi to Bombay, but then you ended up kind of going everywhere. Tell me about the evolution
[Amit Varma]: of that, because some of the stories during this time are absolutely unforgettable. And
[Amit Varma]: even in the sort of questions that you ask, like elsewhere, you've spoken about one of
[Amit Varma]: the questions that intrigued you was when people leave, when migrants leave, when they're
[Amit Varma]: leaving from home to go to the village, what do they carry? And even a simple question
[Amit Varma]: like that can, you know, the answers to that can just reveal so much. Just sort of tell
[Amit Varma]: me about that experience and how you grew during it. Like, what are the things that
[Amit Varma]: you learned about the country during that time, which is not to of course, minimize
[Amit Varma]: your 20 plus years of experience before that, but...
[Guest]: No, no, but it's a great question. No, it's a great question. Because one of the things
[Guest]: that I feel about COVID is that it taught me not just about, see, I always understood
[Guest]: India's inequities as an academic understanding and not as a lived one, right? The other thing
[Guest]: is that I never did reporting on those inequities because it was considered in the hierarchy
[Guest]: of news feature reporting, right? So very coarsely put, I was a conflict reporter, I
[Guest]: covered war and conflict, insurgency and foreign policy, sometimes politics. And I didn't see
[Guest]: myself as someone who covered poverty or education or health. And unfortunately, because we in
[Guest]: the hierarchy of newsrooms placed those as sort of social justice featurey reports, people
[Guest]: like me had no experience, maybe on the odd We The People episode, but just no lived experience
[Guest]: telling these stories. And I remember in the early days, I went to this, there were two
[Guest]: things that happened right near Delhi, and I didn't even know those places existed. And
[Guest]: one was this village in Delhi, or I forget now if it's Delhi or it's UP, but I think
[Guest]: it's Delhi. No, it's Delhi. And you can get to it only by boat. And it's in Delhi. It's
[Guest]: in Delhi. And I was like, and you go on some swanky flyover, and you go under the flyover,
[Guest]: and you hit some, you know, you go left inside some neighborhood. And then there is literally
[Guest]: a village where till this date, the only way to get to it is by boat, right? And I was
[Guest]: like, what? Okay, so that was an example. And then there was another village, I think
[Guest]: that was in Haryana, it's about an hour from the capital, where of course, there was no
[Guest]: civic water supply, right? Now you have this yellow water. So it was like, I remember I
[Guest]: did this story called the village with the yellow water. And everybody at that time was
[Guest]: like water, wash your hands, wash your hands. But when these, firstly, it was wrong science,
[Guest]: but we didn't know it then. And we thought at that time that COVID could be transmitted
[Guest]: by surfaces. But when these villagers would go and wash their hands with this contaminant
[Guest]: water, because there were some factories that had come up in the neighborhood, their skin
[Guest]: would break into rashes. So they were able to wash their hands with this yellow water.
[Guest]: So they would either have to, whatever, boil that water, get rid of its yellow or buy mineral
[Guest]: water and so on. And they didn't have the money to buy mineral water, right? Now, I
[Guest]: know I sound like one of those sort of Orientalist, sort of white people coming to India for the
[Guest]: first time. I'm just saying, I had never told these stories. I personally had never reported
[Guest]: these stories. I had never been exposed to the scale of poverty, despair, inequity on
[Guest]: a daily basis. And I've been beaten and thrashed more times than I can count, had near life
[Guest]: and death experiences. But I remember once, I saw this viral video of these migrant workers
[Guest]: who were appealing, someone please get us home, someone please get us home. And I don't
[Guest]: forget now how I traced them, but I traced them down. And it turned out, again, that
[Guest]: they were working for a factory based in Delhi. So I went to the factory and I found that
[Guest]: there were these sort of ceiling high corrugated till sheets and a lock, a kind of lock on
[Guest]: the compound. I somehow managed to make my way into this compound. And I started talking
[Guest]: to the people there and I discovered that they were basically locked inside this compound.
[Guest]: So in this some sort of largesse of the owner way, the owner decided, the owner of this
[Guest]: factory decided that the best way to keep these workers safe was to keep them under
[Guest]: lock and key for their own good, for their own good in courts. And so there was this
[Guest]: board with this timings when they were allowed to step out of this compound and otherwise
[Guest]: they were kept under lock and key. And when we started filming the story, the security
[Guest]: guards came, they snatched our cameras, they took away our equipment and they were like,
[Guest]: get the hell out of there. And I obviously created such a noise and I still had my phone
[Guest]: and I started tweeting Kejriwal and all of that. It was 45 minutes before we were able
[Guest]: to get out of there. And of course, after that, you know, they were allowed to go out
[Guest]: and they were given money and they were put on, there were no trains. So I don't know
[Guest]: what happened and what happened eventually. I forget now because there were so many stories
[Guest]: I did, but I'm saying these were the kind of experiences that, you know, I was like,
[Guest]: how was all this happening under my nose? And I never thought it important enough to
[Guest]: report because obviously all of this was happening under my nose, right? All of our noses. So
[Guest]: one was the inequity, living and observing, witnessing it every day. But the second was
[Guest]: the invisibilization of the inequity, right? The invisibilization, the lack of interest
[Guest]: in these stories. And yet, because I essentially see myself as a storyteller and not as an
[Guest]: activist and this is something important to me, I knew that I can't stand at some pulpit
[Guest]: and tell everybody, oh, how wrong it is for you to not care about the poor of this country,
[Guest]: right? I had to tell the stories in such a way that people would care. And that's why
[Guest]: I really do believe that it all comes back to effective storytelling. So yeah, you've
[Guest]: already summarized that it started with me going, I would spend 16 hours in the car and
[Guest]: I would come back to Delhi, just stop sleeping. I think the damage is a very slow growing
[Guest]: damage. It doesn't hit you instantly, especially if you've had reasonable exposure to violence
[Guest]: and tragedy and despair. But to see tragedy day after day, to see death day after day,
[Guest]: to see people shut out of hospitals, the doors shut in their face. I saw a new mother whose
[Guest]: baby was one day old, outside a hospital that couldn't take her in. I reported the story
[Guest]: of a painter, when I say a painter, I mean a house painter who took his own life after
[Guest]: selling his phone for 2,500 rupees to buy a table fan in Roshan. One year later, I went
[Guest]: to see what happened to his family. They lived in the same slum, completely invisible, completely
[Guest]: forgotten. You know, Jyoti, the girl who cycled with her father back home to Bihar. I went
[Guest]: back to her village a year later. I found myself, I don't know what the word is, but
[Guest]: I found that it was like a slow growing depression. A slow growing depression and a slow growing
[Guest]: mental damage. That is how I do react. I react in the first flush by simply getting the story
[Guest]: out there. And it's only when I step back and I allow that internalization to take place
[Guest]: of the enormity of what one has just witnessed, I just stop sleeping. I think I haven't slept.
[Guest]: Like if you ask me what's been the singular change in me, I think I can't sleep anymore.
[Guest]: I just cannot sleep anymore. And I'm old enough to recognize that it's the damage of everything
[Guest]: that I have witnessed. You also come back with guilt. You can't help it. You know it's
[Guest]: not rational, but there is guilt for your privilege. You know that you can, you know,
[Guest]: I think I was talking to Rekha Jha and I said to her that I come back to defense colony
[Guest]: and I go and buy Cadbury's nutties and I see the dissonance and I put them in my car and
[Guest]: I say, okay, I'm going to be on the road for 14 hours, 15 hours, 16 hours. I eat these
[Guest]: nutties and you see the dissonance because you're meeting that child, the nine-year-old
[Guest]: who will tell you COVID means I don't have food to eat. When I asked the worker, what
[Guest]: is it that you carry when you leave? He had a white plastic bucket. And I said, is it
[Guest]: okay if with you, if I take the lid off and I took the lid off and in his bucket, and
[Guest]: I found this so moving that I, I think I cried all night that day, were his ozans. They were
[Guest]: just his workman's tools. So this migrant worker getting on, by that time there were
[Guest]: trucks getting, paying 5,000 rupees to get a spot on that crowded truck to some town,
[Guest]: is leaving only with one thing, a plastic bucket, which has his tools, which means he
[Guest]: wants to work, right? He wants to work. He's willing, he's not asking for charity. He wants
[Guest]: to work and that's what he's leaving with. I had a very, very strange experience with
[Guest]: the PPE, which I should talk a little bit about. It was actually extraordinary. So,
[Guest]: you know, when we went into these hospitals, we had to wear the same PPE. We would carry
[Guest]: it from Delhi so that we didn't cut into doctor's stocks. And literally every time I wore one,
[Guest]: I would rush out of the hospital, stripped to the skin and feel nauseous. And that evening,
[Guest]: invariably feel depressed and cry in whatever room I was staying in and call up a friend
[Guest]: and say, oh, it was a PPE day. And it made no scientific sense to me. Till I interviewed
[Guest]: a nurse in Mumbai at Kama Hospital and she had an extraordinary story. And she said that
[Guest]: she was there the night Kasab broke into the hospital and she'd saved, you know, a lot
[Guest]: of lives that day. And she told me that she feels sick every time she wears the PPE. And
[Guest]: in particular, if she is menstruating and she has to wear her PPE, she says something
[Guest]: about the plastic and the smell and it just, and maybe it's the thing, absence of oxygen
[Guest]: to your brain. And, you know, and, and, and that she would just, that it would have this
[Guest]: kind of psychosomatic impact on her. And I said, you know, I, I mean, I wear it for half
[Guest]: an hour and I come out tonight. I said, I can't even imagine what you'll go through.
[Guest]: But I began to realize that there was so much here that we didn't, you know, we didn't understand.
[Guest]: So, or I used to think maybe I think it's the PPE, it's just my depression transferring.
[Guest]: So the things I don't know, but I think I became a somewhat solitary and sad person
[Guest]: in these 16 months. And I continue to be that in some ways, like in, except when I'm reporting
[Guest]: a story, I just suddenly feel energized. But otherwise there's a, there's a sense of feeling
[Guest]: deflated by so much despair, you know, so much and so much happening around you that
[Guest]: gives you no hope. So I think that's, that's how one feels. And, and yet through it all,
[Guest]: because it's all contradictory, just the opportunity to report the biggest news assignment that
[Guest]: the world will, we will ever see as journalists in our lifetime. And that's what I told everybody
[Guest]: in my team. I said, it is actually a privilege to be able to report the story, to be an exempt
[Guest]: essential services media in this country. This in my lifetime is the biggest story I
[Guest]: will ever report. I recognize.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Sometimes, sometimes it feels grandiose when people come up with that old cliche about
[Amit Varma]: journalism being the first draft of history, but I think the import of that is something
[Amit Varma]: that really comes out here. And you mentioned the, you know, the workman carrying his azaar
[Amit Varma]: in a bucket. And it reminded me of one of my favorite episodes of the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: that I did with Anshul Malhotra, who wrote that beautiful book on, you know, what people
[Amit Varma]: carry with them through partition. And, you know, specifically, I remember this, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there's one family which didn't carry their, what you would think their valuables and their
[Amit Varma]: ornaments and this and that, but they carried vessels for the practical reason that they
[Amit Varma]: might have to cook food somewhere along the way if they are given food. So poignant. And
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned the house painter Mukesh, right? And, and the story you did from a Haryana
[Amit Varma]: village in this also stayed with me is a migrant worker from Bihar. He sells his mobile phone
[Amit Varma]: for 2000 bucks, but you know, buys a fan for 500 bucks, because it's really hot. Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: gives 1500 to his wife and kills himself. And at this moment, everything changes, right?
[Amit Varma]: That 2000 from being such a, you know, you get 2000 bucks for a, like, that's one Zomato
[Amit Varma]: order for us. And 2000 bucks, and there's a whole world in that. And the act of giving
[Amit Varma]: it to his wife and then going and whatever, it's, it's like unbelievable. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: these stories contain so much that need to be told. And, you know, more credit to you
[Amit Varma]: for that. We're coming to the end of our time. So like a couple of final questions. And for
[Amit Varma]: one, I'm again, going to read out a poem that you posted on Instagram. And I especially
[Amit Varma]: love like the first couple of lines of it. And this is called Little Crazy Love Song
[Amit Varma]: by Mary Oliver. I don't want eventual I want soon. It's 5am it's noon. It's dusk falling
[Amit Varma]: to dark I listen to music I eat up a few wild poems while time creeps along as though it's
[Amit Varma]: got all day. This is what I have the dull hangover of waiting the blush of my heart
[Amit Varma]: on the damp grass, the flower face moon, a gull broods on the shore where a moment ago
[Amit Varma]: they were to softly my right hand fondles my left hand as though it were you stop good
[Amit Varma]: and I just love this poem. And those first two lines I don't want eventual I want soon.
[Amit Varma]: And that has a resonance to me also beyond the notion of romantic love, which this poem
[Amit Varma]: seems to allude to, you know, because as I think as I have grown older, I have come to
[Amit Varma]: realize that the only way to be happy is to redefine my conception of happiness to taking
[Amit Varma]: joy in what is current in what is present in the present moment rather than, you know,
[Amit Varma]: look ahead to other things. So you've mentioned how everything about this pandemic kind of
[Amit Varma]: drove you to despair during your reporting that the world can be such a harsh place sometimes.
[Amit Varma]: So have your conceptions of what you need to do to be happy or what you look forward
[Amit Varma]: to each day? Has that evolved over a period of time? Like where is it now? I could easily
[Amit Varma]: ask you or career wise tell me where will Barkha be in 10 years and whatever. But I
[Amit Varma]: think what makes me more interested is what makes you happy? You know, are there are there
[Amit Varma]: small pleasures? What do you look forward to?
[Guest]: I mean, I think that poem really spoke to me because I don't think there's a lot of
[Guest]: time. I don't actually understand people who say there's time for this. There's time for
[Guest]: that. Be patient. I don't think there's a lot of time. And if ever we needed any instruction
[Guest]: in how little time there is, I think this pandemic taught us that, right? I am haunted
[Guest]: by the fact that my father's last text message to me, which I didn't even respond to because
[Guest]: I mean, after that, our exchange was only about hospitals and medicines, was about some
[Guest]: music system in my house that he wanted to fix and set up to some speakers. And I thought
[Guest]: he was irritating me about it. And I'll, you know, discuss it with him later. And why has
[Guest]: he got so obsessed with his music system? And he used to love tinkering with equipment
[Guest]: and a bit of an engineer and mechanical sort of hobbyist. And I kept saying, oh, yeah,
[Guest]: this time when I come back from this set of travels, I'll go and meet him and I'll do
[Guest]: this and I'll do that. There's never time. There's never time. It's the here. It's the
[Guest]: now. But at the same time, that doesn't mean I believe only in the ephemeral moment. I
[Guest]: simply believe that if you want something, you know, a new story, an ambition, a person,
[Guest]: you've got to go for it with everything you have, because you may not get that opportunity
[Guest]: ever again. I really do believe that and I believe that even more today than I ever did.
[Guest]: What makes you be happy? Very small things, very, very small things. I don't have any
[Guest]: meta. I mean, the meta things are the same that they would be for everybody, right? Like,
[Guest]: you know, I obviously care very much about my work. I care very much what happens to
[Guest]: Mojo. If Mojo does well, it would make me very happy. My work matters a lot to me. But
[Guest]: otherwise, small things that make me happy, you know, I mean, I don't know, I watch Murder
[Guest]: Mystery and it makes me happy. I'm obsessed with watching Murder Mysteries or espionage
[Guest]: or thrillers. I'm obsessed with eating off the street. I'm obsessed with eating chaat.
[Guest]: I eat chaat from every vedi, every vendor. Like the smallest town I've been to, I have
[Guest]: had a plate of golgappas from there. These silly things and travel makes me happy. And
[Guest]: I have survived these 16 months because despite the despair and the tragedy and the horror,
[Guest]: I did not experience a lockdown. I am one of those lucky people that I did not experience
[Guest]: a lockdown. And that is why I say that, you know, to be able to experience a reality outside
[Guest]: of the reality I was born into is the ultimate privilege of journalism. And even in all its
[Guest]: sadness, it makes me happy, if that makes any sense. It makes me happy that I'm able
[Guest]: to unlearn, learn, sometimes make a difference, sometimes get somebody to contribute financially
[Guest]: to their bank accounts, sometimes just the adventure of it. There are many different,
[Guest]: you know, buttons it taps. But journalism for everything makes me happy. It makes me
[Guest]: really happy.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. So a final question. And I think you've kind of answered some of the next question
[Amit Varma]: in the answer that you just gave. But if there are young people listening to this, say young
[Amit Varma]: people of any gender who want to get into journalism or want to be journalists, or if
[Amit Varma]: there are specifically young women who don't necessarily want to be journalists, but are
[Amit Varma]: just trying to navigate life as it is in this performative age, where, you know, voices
[Amit Varma]: can be so shrill and expectations can be so harsh, what would be your advice to them?
[Amit Varma]: And one of them you've just given is embrace the present moment, just, you know, have a
[Amit Varma]: bias towards action, as it were. But, you know, what else would you like to share with
[Amit Varma]: them?
[Guest]: You know, I was once doing a talk for a group of women. And I said, no, there were men too
[Guest]: actually in that meeting. And I said that I want to do a kind of straw poll here. And
[Guest]: I said, it's my sense that if I asked the women here, how many of you have had to suppress
[Guest]: your dreams, you know, that how I think that more than 90% would say yes. And we just did
[Guest]: this experiment. And it was 95% of the women in the audience said that they'd had to set
[Guest]: aside their dream for something or the other. And I would like to say, in particular to
[Guest]: young women, please be selfish. And I know that this is not a politically correct thing
[Guest]: to say, but the romance around selflessness and sacrifice when it comes to women, in particular
[Guest]: Indian women, this romance around being superwomen, who are all things to all people, the self-created
[Guest]: romance that women will, these compliments that we will give ourselves, although we're
[Guest]: great multitaskers, these are chains of gold, right? They sound like compliments. All they
[Guest]: do is to crush your original passion. This life is not worth living if you have not lived
[Guest]: your original, at least if you have not tried to pursue whatever that thing is that keeps
[Guest]: you up at night, right? It doesn't have to be journalistic. It can be whatever. But please,
[Guest]: in this fragile time, if anything we have learned, it is that, you know, that old cliche,
[Guest]: you live just once and there isn't a lot of time. If you want to be a journalist, I will
[Guest]: still say, yes, I know the TV channels present a different template, but I will still say
[Guest]: you will be remembered only if you're authentic and you will be authentic only if you love
[Guest]: this. If you do not love it, no judgment, but don't do it.
[Amit Varma]: That's incredible advice. Thank you so much, you know, for your inspiring words now and
[Amit Varma]: at other times as well. So, you know, thanks for your time and insights and thanks for
[Amit Varma]: all the work you do.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit. I can't believe the three hours have flown by. So, full compliments
[Guest]: to you for that. Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Cheers. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do follow Barkha on Twitter at BeeDat. That's
[Amit Varma]: one word. You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and The Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.